# The Internet, *Ulysses,* and Me:

# A Cut-Up and Remediated Journey through James Joyce's *Ulysses* 

My contribution to ["The Long Now of *Ulysses*"](http://www.congress2013.ca/program/events/long-now-ulysses-curating-literature-after-internet) exhibit is a print-based remediation of James Joyce's novel, meant to operate as an analog data visualization that asks its reader to think critically about the political economy and value of attention, looking, and reading across digital and analog media. To create the piece, I took a hardcover copy of the novel, [Modern Library's 1934 edition](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/853/modernlibrary.jpg/), and, cutting and ~~striking-through~~ text, attempted to map out and visualize web-based reading practices onto a canonical modernist text. Photo documentation of the remediation and its construction can be found [here](http://imageshack.us/user/mkjacobs). Images are referenced and explained throughout the portfolio.

## What I Did, or, Cutting-Up and Striking-Out a Work of Literary Genius, or, How to Read a Book Like it's the Internet: 

In order to situate and better explain my contribution to The Long Now exhibit, I want to outline the process of conceptualizing the project. It begins where good critical inquiries often begin, with an earnest attempt to question my own prejudices, in this case, my attitude toward the so-called digital age and its technologies.

Two statements in the [rationale](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/ThoughtPiece/prospectus.md) for the exhibit helped form ideas of how I might contribute: firstly, the exhibit's interest in the relationship between the everyday and both the form and the content of modernist literary aesthetics, how "modernist works of art increasingly turned to the everyday random experience of the city and rapid-fire technologies for their subject matter;" secondly, the timeliness of the exhibit, what its "first-ever publication online" could mean to Joyce's novel and its endurance.

What struck me most initially, regarding the Long Now and *Ulysses*, was just how much everyday practices have changed since Joyce wrote the novel in the 1920s. Imagining Bloom's everyday as it might unfold today is startling, because so much of what we do now is entirely mediated by screens, totally changing the meaning of randomness and encounter, space and time. So, maybe on 16 June 2013, Bloom wouldn't go out to buy a kidney, because he orders his groceries online from an organic grocery-delivery service; he can't read a paper in the jakes because his news now lives somewhere in the tubes and tunnels of the web; he might sell ads for domains; he would almost certainly conduct his adulterous correspondence with Martha via email and text message; and maybe he would even print out that bar of lemony soap he buys from F.W. Sweny's chemist shop, on a 3-D printer! In fact, Bloom might not leave his house at all. The interface of a computer and the network of the WWW might mediate all random encounters with the outside world, from *inside* his home. To me, it seemed tragic and trite to consider the loss of what I thought of as the "real world" to this ephemeral and corrupting influence of all things digital. Could I imagine Bloom discovering Molly and Blazes's affair in a carelessly left-open email account? *Ughhh*. I shuddered.

I tried to situate my gut responses to the confluence of the digital and the literary in the follow questions, meant to guide our contributions to the exhibit:

"In a so-called digital age (when people access so much information online), how should a literary exhibit function? What should it do? What is its appeal? How should it manifest and engage audiences? Through what channels and modes? Under what assumptions?"

Initially, my reflex was just to insist on the importance of the endurance of print, and print novels in particular. Admittedly, I fetishize analog media. Because I had heard rumbling rumours about the death of the novel, how no one reads anymore, how print publishers are floundering, how hard it can be to get undergraduate students to read longer texts, etc., and because I felt uneasy about such sentiments, I wanted to investigate how the practice of reading is changing in the digital age, especially the practice of reading literature. I wanted to foreground the significance of the materiality of print! So, in the beginning, I anchored my research in visually-inspired literature, where the material and visual aspects of a book are as meaningful as its narrative. I already had in mind some "print+" books I had come across before and found totally inspiring; others I discovered during my research for the project. Here is a list of a few compelling and beautiful examples:

* [Visual Editions](http://www.visual-editions.com/) is an excellent example of how publishers are re-imagining print. 
* Jonathan Safran Foer's [*Tree of Codes*](http://www.visual-editions.com/our-books/tree-of-codes) is a book that, using die-cutting, creates a new narrative from an existing text; it is truly a book that cannot be read or experienced digitally. 
* The same goes for Adam Thirwell's [*Kapow\!*](http://www.visual-editions.com/our-books/kapow), with its unfolding pages and typographic tricks that map the trajectory of the narrative.
* I particularly like the work of [Lauren Redniss](http://www.laurenredniss.com/), especially *Radioactive* and *Century Girl*. 
* Graham Rawle's [*Woman's World*](http://www.grahamrawle.com/womansworld/index.html), a full-length novel written entirely in collage from 1960s womens' magazines, is amazing.  
* One of my favourite blogs, *Brain Pickings*, includes some inspiring selections in its [Best Books of 2012](http://www.brainpickings.org/index.php/2012/12/26/best-books-2012-reader-favorites/), including *The Where, The Way, and the How*, a book that considers how a sense of wonder might be lost in our age of instant information, and Yayoi Kusama’s *Alice and Wonderland*. 
* Tom Phillip's truly brilliant [*A Humument*](http://humument.com/). 
* I was also drawn to the more mathematically-based, algorithmic textual processes used to create new narratives from existing ones by groups such as [OuLiPo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oulipo). An interesting example that actually seems to perform better in its digital than its analog manifestation, is Raymond Queneau's [*One Hundred Thousand Billion Sonnets (Cent Mille Milliards de poèmes)*](http://www.growndodo.com/wordplay/oulipo/10%5e14sonnets.html).

While most of these examples do engage the importance of analog materiality, I couldn't assert that any were directly responding to the digital age, per se. Artist books, illustrated texts, and OuLiPo techniques existed long before the appearance of networked technology, so while the significance of analog materiality to *Tree of Codes*, for example, might have a new meaning in our current cultural moment, I wanted to produce something that would act as a direct commentary on the evolving relationship between the digital and the literary.

Two articles most informed the thrust of my project. The first was N. Katherine Hayles’s ["Hyper and Deep Attention: The Generational Divide in Cognitive Modes."](http://engl449_spring2010_01.commons.yale.edu/files/2009/11/hayles.pdf) There, Hayles discusses what she sees as an emerging generational divide that marks a shift in modes of cognition, what she understands as a preference or development of either "hyper" or "deep" cognitive styles, where deep attention is marked by the ability to sustain concentration for long periods of time--for example, the practice of reading a novel or solving a complex math problem (187). On the other hand, hyper attention provides the ability to rapidly switch focus and navigate multiple environmental stimuli and is usually interactive in nature (187). Hayles argues that hyper attention may in fact be more conducive to the demands of our present cultural climate, but she also discusses the disadvantages of leaning away from deep attentive practices (194). She especially addresses higher education practitioners, who largely favour deep attentive modes of learning and teaching, which are becoming less and less relatable to younger generations (194).
  
Hayles is compelling, and I appreciate her refusal to privilege one cognitive style over the other and advance the pros and cons of both. In addition to Hayles, Jonathan Beller’s [“Paying Attention”](http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/24/beller.php) influenced the iterations of my project. Beller argues that human attention is productive of value, something that most web users, for instance, might be totally unaware of. He states:

"Like clean air, attention is something that once could be had for free but is now being encroached upon as the next and perhaps final frontier. Attention is now a commodity, and a special kind of commodity at that...That's a theory, at least" (n.pag.).

According to Beller, looking is labour, and the digital mediascape presupposes and relies on this "attention economy" (n.pag.). The subsumption of cognitive-linguistic capacities, which, according to Marx, used to be part of the commons, marks, for Beller, the “full economization of not only culture but of what was once called ‘human’” (n.pag.). Both Hayles and Beller stress the value of attention, and in addition, Beller points out that new media constantly responds to individual needs and desires, continually being reinvented and reconfigured to meet the fickle demands of its users. If, as Hayles argues, younger people spend more and more time in digital environments designed to hold their attention and keep them there, if these users are always in control of their media experience, and if that media is invested in *them*, how might this change how one interacts with literature? In other words: how does the web change the way we read? This was the question I wanted my project to address.

To tease this out, I researched usability studies. [Usability testing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usability_testing) is basically user-centered research that evaluates how effective a product, interface, etc. is to a “real” user. Usability tests are largely tied to commercial concerns, and the findings that usability studies provide are interesting. For example, the website [UX Myths](http://uxmyths.com/) (UX standing for user experience), states this as [“Myth #1”: ](http://uxmyths.com/post/647473628/myth-people-read-on-the-web) People read on the web. [*Smashing Magazine*](http://www.smashingmagazine.com/), an online publication for web developers, has this to say in an article titled [“The Path to Advertising Nirvana:”](http://uxdesign.smashingmagazine.com/2010/04/12/the-path-to-advertising-nirvana/)

"As a general rule, when people surf the Web, they’re in control of the experience. If someone wants information about a particular topic, they might query Google or look up an article on Wikipedia. Regardless of what they do, they choose how to obtain the information they want” (n.pag).

The more research I did, the more this point became abundantly clear: the web is designed to cater to the user. A second realization followed: literature seems largely disinterested in the reader. A reader certainly does not control the structure of a narrative, for example. If I had grown up totally immersed in a culture where the media I interacted with was vying for my attention and I had the instant ability to change and cater my experience, I honestly wonder, would I be at all interested in reading novels? Frankly, I am not sure I would. I had never thought about the politics of the web, or attention value, or how digital technology might actually be changing cognitive practices. 

These insights helped produce my remediation of *Ulysses*. Attempting to represent how hyper-attentive reading styles might affect reading literature, I decided to try to map the practices of reading on the web onto a print novel. After a lot of deliberation, I chose to use my own web-based reading practices as the data model for my project. Following the twenty-four hour narrative structure of *Ulysses*, I took twenty-four hours of my web history as the data I would map onto my reading the novel.

[Data Model](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/DataModel/JacobsenDataModel.xlsx)

As you can see from my data model, the time I spend per web page is relatively short. I produced a visualization of my browsing history within the novel by simply setting [a timer](http://www.online-stopwatch.com/countdown-timer/) and then reading *Ulysses* for the corresponding amount of time I had spent on a web page until I bounced to a new page or domain. I would set the timer and read *Ulysees* for fifteen seconds if I had been on a webpage for fifteen seconds. When the timer went off, wherever I was in the text, I would [cut out](http://imageshack.us/f/191/cut1z.jpg/) that word, [using](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/835/cuttingj.jpg/) a [razor blade and cutting matt](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/543/bladeandmat.jpg/). Then, I would count the cut-out window as a [“link” to the underlying page](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/259/buckmulligan.jpg/), and later I [struck-through the text in between](http://imageshack.us/f/69/strikethrough.jpg/) with a [ball-point pen and a ruler](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/560/penandruler.jpg/), creating a visualization of hyper-attentive reading fostered by the web. 

## What I Learned, or, Web Pages Are Not Codexes, or, Attention Was (maybe) Never Had for Free:

I encountered a lot of set-backs and surprises while working on my project. The most glaringly obvious was that I just was not able to really read a novel like I read the web. While it might seem naive, for whatever reason I truly was surprised by this revelation. Here is an excerpt from a log entry I wrote during the first iteration of my remediation:

Things were going along fine...

>"But then...trouble! I read to the end of one page, flipped to the verso, alarm, cut...turn back to the page I just came from? Oh, no! I was now reading the novel backwards. I had not yet done any of the strikethrough, so, I thought, this might be salvageable, maybe even desirable. I realized that, of course, I do not read the web in a linear fashion, and I often return, again and again, to the home page of a site, to my email inbox, to a page I've been before. So, of course my reading of the novel based on how I read the web would not follow a linear pattern. Great! An unexpected surprise. So, I went with it, roaming back over the pages I had just read. But, the further back I went, the more the cuts on the verso effected the recto, and, when I looked at it holistically, it made no sense at all to someone who would read it in a linear fashion. Also, the position of the typeface on the verso does not correspond to that of the recto, so the surprising and compelling narrative that was revealed in the initial cuts did not surface, and really just seemed to make a mess of things. (See image: ["verso cuts"](http://imageshack.us/f/29/versocuts.jpg/) and ["verso"](http://imageshack.us/f/69/versohz.jpg/))

I was quite hung up on this problem, what I saw as a major setback. I wanted to justify and maintain an honesty about reading *both* literary novels and webpages, and I just couldn't reconcile the two. So, I decided to maintain the "honesty" of web-based reading by ignoring and striking-through all of the verso text (logic: web pages are not codexes; they do not have a verso).

Once I had this problem solved, so to speak, I soon encountered two new issues that were not so easily overcome. The first was the crumbling materiality of the text itself. About halfway through my first remediation, a [paperback Penguin edition](http://imageshack.us/f/534/penguineditionulysses.jpg/), the pages of the novel began tearing away from their binding. Because I had to continually break and strain the spine while I was cutting and striking, and because the book was old and secondhand, it simply couldn't [endure the surgery](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/18/brokenspine.jpg/) and just fell apart. I tried [gluing the thing back together](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/201/theblob.jpg/), which looked horribly ugly, and still in the end wouldn't hold. So, I went back to the beginning, this time with a [sewn and bound hardcover copy](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/14/sewnandbound.jpg/), all the while (kind of) laughing to myself; thinking of Wendy Chun's brilliant article, "The Enduring Ephemeral, or The Future is a Memory," which illustrates the enduring and persistant nature of digital objects and their paradoxical materiality; reconsidering how I conceptualize the material; and ruminating on what does and does not persist! Ha ha ha. Lol. ;)

The last problem, remaining unsolvable, was the considerable amount of time and labour this project required, which I had not anticipated, or, at least, not the extent to which these things would become limitations and concerns. I had not imagined how painstaking and laborious [striking-through](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/191/strikethrough2.jpg/) all of those thousands of lines of text could be. I had not imagined it even possibly taking so long. I could not have dreamed up how boring it would be. I did not anticipate that it would actually cause my muscles to seize up and ache. This sounds hyperbolic. I assure you, it's not. Funnily enough, the lines I made look [strikingly](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/802/strikethrough3.jpg/) like the [strike-through function](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/542/strikethrough1.jpg/) of a word processor. And I kept imagining how easy it would be, how split-second, to just Command A --> Command C --> Strikethrough all of that text. Resenting the process and mourning all the time I could be learning, researching, and writing, I realized the naivety of my nostalgic longing for the everyday of the "real world" of Bloom's 1904. "Yeah, I don't like computers," I used to say. Hmmm...except for when they save me from all of the wearying, awful, arduos, toilsome tasks I would otherwise have to undertake. So now, maybe, I can say: "I love *and* hate you, computers." 

Beyond re-evaluating my presumptions about the value of all things digital, my project surprised me in other ways, ways that might even speak back to Beller and his claims about looking as labour and attention as value. One such surprise was how inverted the relationship became between reading on the web and reading a novel in print. For example, looking at my [data model](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/DataModel/JacobsenDataModel.xlsx), cells 69-85, which map a total of seventeen minutes of reading on the web, traversed over fifty pages of *Ulysses*. Now, becuase *Ulysses* is so nefariously obscure and complex, getting through fifty pages would require a good two hours of sustained attention, if not more. When I look at two hours of my web-browsing history, I have bounced through countless domains, gleaning new (although arguable cursory) understanding and insight on a variety of topics and issues. On the web, I am able (to a limited degree) to determine how I find information, and I can access a variety of diverse sources and perspectives. I guess I harboured a secret naive belief that somehow books, literature, great literature like *Ulysses* especially, was, although obviously not ideologically neutral, at the very least more ideologically/ethically/morally circumspect than the gross, haphazard, common, and lowly internet. 

The point, besides mocking my own blindly and wildly clung-to prejudices, is that, in terms of attention, a novel, especially a complex novel like *Ulysses*, requires a very considerable about of time, labour, and attention of its reader. Who does that reader labour for? Himself? Is reading a high-modernist novel gleaning some cultural capital? An institution? Is Joyce just filling seats in classes on The Modernist Novel on university campuses? (Case in point: when I went to purchase the copies I used for my project at a local used book store, the clerk inquired of me, "Are you a student? I only ask because we have a student discount, and who else reads *Ulysses*?")

Maybe we do read simply for pleasure, but, it strikes me that perhaps attention is something that was never freely had or given. Whether attention is tethered to the political economy of the web, or the political economy of literature, or film, or theatre, or whatever, something or someone is always invested. And, although art and literature are worth all of the attention in the world, I like how the digital economy is opening up spaces that might empower a person, give her control over her own attention-value, even if that manifests as countless hours of unpaid labour-looking for Facebook and Twitter. In ["The Possibilities and Limitations of Open Content"](http://vimeo.com/16647697), a keynote lecture delivered at HKU Space in 2010, Chun addresses the inherent problems of crowd-sourced labour, the labour required to produce Wikipedia in particular. She notes that Wikipedia is usually either cast as a "Marxist Paradise or a Capitalist Hell." Funnily enough, it seems to me that all reading, all appreciation of art, and all pleasure, at least in our current cultural moment, can be cast into this dichotomy. Certainly, like all binaries, this one too is false, leaving out seepages and gaps and ambiguity, but, nevertheless, it is important to continually engage with, restate, and become more aware of where and how we attend, labour, and  produce knowledge. What does it mean to know, create, read, write, and think in the so-called digital age? After all, maybe things haven't really changed so much since 1904.

## The Left-Overs and the Left-Undones, or, What I Didn't Do that I Said I Would, or, What I Might Do if I Had More Time:

I don't need to think much about what I would do with my project if I had more time. That's simple: I would finish it. I would get to the end of the novel, remediating every page (I only was able to remediate about a quarter of the text, for the exhibit). I would take more time to consider the [new narrative I've created](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/202/newnarrationsequence1.jpg/). I would try to articulate the interpretive possibilities of my work. I would take all of the [random poetry](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/7/cutoutpoetry1.jpg/) the cut-up words produced, and I might do something with that, too. I would think more about the importance of what is left out and what is left behind, intact, find a way to interpret both in a meaningful way. Because *Ulysses* is so formally challenging, I would like to try this visualization with other texts, maybe more popular novels, *Fifty Shades of Grey* or *Twilight*. I wonder how things might change. Would the cut-out words be as [poetic](http://imageshack.us/photo/my-images/59/cutoutpoetry2.jpg/)? Would the remediated text make more sense? In the end, remediating *Ulysses* allowed me to create a visualization of how two disparate cultural innovations, modernist aesthetics and the internet, might converge, bridging the reading practices of "high" elitist literature and the "lowly" webpage.

## Works Cited

Beller, Jonathan. "Paying Attention." *Cabinet* 24 (2006/2007): n.pag. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. "The Enduring Ephemeral, or the Future Is a Memory." *Critical Inquiry* 35.1 (2008): 148-171. Print.

--. "The Possibilities and Limitations of Open Content." HKU Space, Hong Kong. 19 Sept. 2010. Keynote address. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Foer, Jonathan Safran. *Tree of Codes.* London: Visual Editions, 2010. Print.

Gócza, Zoltán. *UX Myths,* n.p., 2010. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Hayles, N. Katherine. "Hyper and Deep Attention: The Generational Divide in Cognitive Modes." *Profession* 13 (2007): 187-199. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Joyce, James. *Ulysses*. New York: Modern Library, 1942. Print.

*Lauren Redniss,* n.p., n.d. Web. 13 Apr. 2013.

Maier, Andrew. "The Path to Advertising Nirvana." *Smashing Magazine.* Smashing Media. 12 Apr. 2010. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Phillips, Tom. "Humument.com." *Humument.com,* 2012. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Popova, Maria. "Best Books of 2012." *Brainpickings.*  Mediatemple, n.d. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Thirwell, Adam. *Kapow!* London: Visual Editions, 2012. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

"Woman's World." *Graham Rawle,* n.p., n.d. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

*100,000,000,000,000 Sonnets.* Gordon Dow, 1991-2002. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.









