#HyperLit 

##Exploring the Possibilities of a Digital Social Reading of James Joyce's *Ulysses* through Gameful Design
----------------------------------------------------------
In its current iteration, our contribution to the ["The Long Now of *Ulysses*"](http://www.congress2013.ca/program/events/long-now-ulysses-curating-literature-after-internet) exhibit is a wireframe-based prototype and speculative design video for *HyperLit*. *HyperLit* is a social reading environment that uses elements of gameful design to encourage the reading of a digitized version of James Joyce’s *Ulysses*, while also encouraging discussion and engagement with other readers, and critical self-reflexivity on the user’s own reading habits and the digital environments that the app inhabits (Web 2.0 and the digital economy). 

##Some Useful Links
----
Below are some links that, I think, are key to understanding our project. They will be referenced throughout this portfolio, but for means of convenience, you can find them here. 

[Final WireFrames](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/HyperLit/HyperLitWireframesBot.md)

[The Video](http://vimeo.com/63042384)

A Brief History of a [Joyce Bot](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/Logs/JohnsonLogJoyceBotHistory.md)



##The Short Now of *HyperLit*
----------------
The early stages of *HyperLit* were pretty vague and absurdly ambitious. In the early stages of our work, Nina and I were both interested in exploring the temporality of the exhibit. Specifically, I was interested in incorporating a kind of "feedback" or guestbook element to the exhibit in a way that incorporated gameful design. I was drawn to the interesting [Knotted Line](http://knottedline.com/) exhibit, and was struck in particular by the very effective community "feedback" element of the online exhibit. Given that the Knotted Line explores the "relationship between freedom and confinement in the geographic area of the United States," it is a project that, I think, *must* have an effective means of encouraging and visiualizing guest/user input/reactions to content. From the beginning, then, I was interested in exploring the relationship between the content of the exhibit and the responses of visitors/the public, with the idea being that the experience of those who visited the exhibit would, in a sense, be a part of the overall presentation of the exhibit itself. A way that I wanted to tap into these ideas was through exploring how user feedback and the very content of the exhibit might be able to expand beyond the physical space of the exhibit itself. That is, I was interested in exploring how a more dynamic relationship between time, user interaction, and content could be explored and expressed within (or outside of) our class's exhibit. 

This all invariably lead to the idea of extending the project beyond simply being a "one time" use kind of place, and how the experience of the exhibit might be able to "stay with" users for a sustained period of time. My original idea was to incorporate elements of Geocaching, with the idea being that users could download an app that would lead them to "exhibit spots" around the city of Victoria that, in some way, would relate to the exhibit/*Ulysses*. The idea, here, would be that the content and by extension *Ulysses* would become a part of the willing user's "everydayness" through that everyday piece of technology that is the mobile phone. By about this time, Nina and I started working together. We were both, as it turns out, interested in exploring everydayness and elements of gameful design (I had considered incorporating a points system into the Geocaching), so our interests in how to contribute to the exhibit intersected nicely. Nina was very interested in the idea of utilizing a Google Calendar API to visualize an exhibit user's day so to force critical self-reflexivity on one's own daily existence (based, in part, upon Katherine Hayles' "Hyper and Deep Attention" and the work by Jonathan Beller on the attention economy), while also drawing parallels between one's daily existence and the single day that passes in Joyce's *Ulysses.* Invariably, our combined interests lead us to the idea of developing an app (practically impossible, of course, given the timeframe), which resulsted--as a result of suggestions for development by Jentery--in the decision to prototype a speculative design model for a gamified social reader of James Joyce's *Ulysses* along with a speculative design video showcasing the project. 

We decided to produce a piece of speculative design for a number of reasons. For one, we soon realized that building an app simply wasn't possibly in the short amount of time avialable for the project and the limitations of our own technological fluencies. As is often the case with speculative design, however, we decided to work towards something that--while potentially useable and buildable--could also start or influence discourses around gamification, the academy, the possibilities of digital editions, and--of course--the digital humanities. What's more, we wanted our project to fulfill the speculative possibilities of "Design Fiction" as outlined by DiSalvo and Lukens in "Speculative Design and Technological Fluency." Design Fiction, they suggest, "typically highlights prototypes through videos of use scenarios instead of through working models or prototypes" (25). They also describe "Critical Design," a mode of speculative design that adopts a "critical and experimental stance" (25) used to encourage us to "rethink assumptions about the role of products in our lives" (26). I go into more detail about *HyperLit* as forcing a reconsideration of "the tool" later within this document, but what I want to suggest, here, is that this speculative design stance was key in defining what we wanted our project to do. Namely, to force a critical reconsideration/exploration of how we (academics and non-academics alike) understand and consume digitized texts, how culture and gameful design or gaming in general might interact and/or conflict in digital environments, the possibilities for alternative publication practices in digital environments, and how that gap between the public and academic spheres might be reduced. 

In terms of justifying or explaining how our project makes a meaningful contribution to the "Long Now of *Ulysses*" exhibit, I think there are two main points to hit. The first relates to my initial interests in the exhibit as demonstrated by the Knotted Line project. From the beginnings of this project, I have been interested in exploring how user input (or, for lack of better phrase, annotations) might be able to become an integral element of an exhibit or project such as "The Long Now of *Ulysses*." In particular, what might be the best way to capture the responses and critical ideas of users--academic and non-academic alike--visiting the exhibit, and what might be the best way to encourage these kinds of responses? Ultimately, I think a lot of these questions were taken up and explored by Laura Dosky's excellent project, "Annotating the Minutes and Marking the Seconds." As a result of this (and our changing ideas/interests over the semester), *HyperLit* moved more in the direction of imagining how we might be able to leverage elements of Web 2.0 and the attention economy including social-media digital structures and gameful design/gameification to re-imagine scholarly production, peer-review practices, and edition-making. What's more, we were interested in exploring how a reading tool such as *HyperLit*--in utilizing networked modes of [communication](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/New/NewsFeedBOT.png) and [annotation](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/New/InBrowserReadingBOT.png)--might be able to bridge that gap between the "narrowly defined fields [of academic study]" (Fitzpatrick) to "readers outside of the academy" (Fitzpatrick). 

It is worth noting that Fitzpatrick played a key role in the development of *HyperLit*. In "Beyond Metrics," for instance, Fitzpatrick suggests that "the Internet operates within a completely different set of technological affordances [opposedd to print production/peer-reviewed material], which have in turn helped to foster a very different understanding of the creation of authority" (Fitzpatrick n.p). This notion of the creation of authority, I think, is something that we took seriously when thinking about/designing *HyperLit*. That is, how can, in a sense, the intellectual playing field of something like an annotated version of *Ulysses* be evened out? How could we allow for the possibility of having "approved" or "official" annotations by scholars and non-scholars alike? It's helpful, of course, to take a look at one of our wireframes when thinking about this--specifically, the ["in browser reading" screen](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/New/InBrowserReadingBOT.png). Here, of course, you can see the distinction between what we've called here "scholarly" and "community" annotations. "Scholarly Annotations," as the wireframe suggests, are made by "expert readers and [are] peer reviewed." I think it's important that we define that these "scholarly" annotations as being made by "Expert readers" opposed to something like "real academics!" Because, as wireframes like the [badgewall](https://github.com/jonjohns/HyperLitWorkMacHome/blob/master/BADGEWALLBOT1.png) and [reading summary](https://github.com/jonjohns/HyperLitWorkMacHome/blob/master/SessEndReadingSummary%20.png) pages show, there would ideally be a wide variety of data that would be quantifiably compiled about the user which would then, of course, be translated into  properties of gameful design such as points, badges, and achievements. With *HyperLit*, however, the idea is that this quantitative data could be, in a sense, a way to "bridge that gap" between the academic and non-academic realm(s). That is, using elements of gamification (often associated, as Ian Bogost suggests in "Gamification is Bullshit", with "marketing" as a way of domesticating the "wild, coveted beast of videogames" for use in the "grey, hopeless wasteland of big business" [Bogost]) to tackle the problem of what Alan Liu calls "the continuing breakdown [of the humanities] ability to communicate with the public" (Liu n.p). 

Of course, the idea that something like gamification can be used to, in a sense, "market" the reading of a difficult book like *Ulysses* through badges and achievements is problematic. Opposed to selling a product through gamification, *HyperLit* risks selling the cultural currency/capital of "having read *Ulysses*." As a result, it was/is important for our work with *HyperLit* that the critical design elements of our project be sustained through to the final product. And, as mentioned in our logs throughout the semester, we did tend to "get lost" in designing the elements of usability of the app through wireframe development, and found ourselves losing track of the critical foundations and elements informing the project. As a result, while the process of designing a useable thing was important throughout the project, we had to--rather late in the development period--come up with a way to incorporate and make explicit the theories and critical practices informing the project. One way to do this, we thought, would be to make the distinction between "Hyper and Deep Attention" an integral part of the app. Hayles' paper "Hyper and Deep Attention: The Generational Divide in Cognitive Modes" is, of course, a key critical work informing our project. Indeed, as noted, the thrust of the project largely hinges upon leveraging hyper-attentitive mediums to encourage deep attention (reading!). And this is inherent within the design of our project. When looking at the (fullscreen reading wireframe)[https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/ReadingFullScreen.png], for instance, we see that the reader has the option of either reading annotations (marked by a star or a speech bubble) or, as is--unfortunately--not shown, selecting relevant media to the passage at hand (a link to a youtube video, for instance). It is tempting, then, to label a reading practice where a user actively makes annotations, reads other annotations, and follows links to other media/relevant materials as being a kind of conflation between hyper and deep attention. That's all well and good--that potential reading approach (one can turn off annotations or media links in fullscreen mode, for instance) reflects our interest in modes of attention. At the same time, however, would a reader ever tap in to that critical framework? That is, how do you *show* your users how that the tool they are using has a critical backbone? We, of course, played with the idea (and are still attatched to the idea) of having the reader's reading data visualized and characterized as either more or less in the direction of "hyper" or "deep" attention (see that [here](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/SessEndWeeklySummary.png). Still, simply visualizing data of a reader's reading habits doesn't *necessarily* denote or reveal a critical theory or framework. 

So how do you do that? How do you make--to borrow your term, Jentery--"user friendly theory?" To answer this question as best I can, I want to look at a recent article that was recently featured in the New Yorker about two very different but very important games of the past 20 years: Simcity and Dwarf Fortress, two--essentially--city building games that go about depicting planning in very different ways. That article (which I really recommend reading) can be found [here](http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/culture/2013/04/simcitys-evil-twin.html). One quotation in particular struck me in this article (well, it's actually a quotation from a related article), where Winslow-Yost quotes John Seabrook in suggesting that Simcity is "arguably the single most influential work of urban-design theory ever created" (Winslow-Yost). Simcity--it could be argued--might certainly function as a kind of "urban-design theory." What's more, thinking about Simcity, I'm reminded of Michel de Certau's notions of the false "simulacrum" of the "panorama-city [view]" from the "110th floor of the World Trade Center" (Certea 91) when, in his article, Winslow-Yost suggests that in Simcity "The view the player has of them is from exactly the right height: close enough to see the bustle of the cars and trucks, the charmingly repetitive irregularity of the buildings, but too distant to see crime, pollution, frustration, or failure as anything more than slightly disheartening abstractions." I realize that I am getting a bit off track from *HyperLit*, here, but what I want to take away from this is that--yes--there are serious theoretical implications inherent *within* Simcity. This is great, but these theoretical elements wil likely be rendered invisible to 99% of the people who play the game. So, again, I want to return to this question: how do you make that theory--that user friendly theory--an inextricable and explicit part of the game itself? Can a theory be more than a transparent frame? 

We, of course, decided upon the [Joyce Bot](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/Logs/JohnsonLogJoyceBotHistory.md) as a means of bringing out the critical framework of our project; a solution that I think we are both quite happy with. To be honest, how exactly the bot would go about clarifying these elements remains to be seen. I think what interests me about the JoyceBot and the possibilities for it, is how the Bot might be able to reveal the app--a digital reading tool for *Ulysses*, essentially--as something other than simply a container for content or reading tool. That is, as a digital artifact that "refuses transparency" (Ramsay and Rockwell). As Ramsay and Rockwell suggest, "most tools are celebrated for their transparecny," and such tools are "only noticed when they break down or refuse to work transparently" (Ramsay and Rockwell). I think this refusal of transparency--whether theoretical or the status of the app as "tool"--is essential when thinking about *HyperLit* and the JoyceBot. As Ramsay and Rockwell suggest "A digital artifact that transparently shows you something else might convey knowledge, but it doesn’t intervene as an explanation or argument" (Ramsay and Rockwell). So this was, of course, the problem we risked running in to when getting too caught up in the issues of simple usability in *HyperLit's* design phase--simply desingning something (a gameified reader) that shows something else (*Ulysses*). I realize that I have spent a sustained amount of time talking about these problems of useability, "user friendly theory", the JoyceBot, and--of course--the gap between the academic and public spheres. Ultimately, what I want to suggest is that this gap between academia and the "outside world" might potentially be bridged through "user friendly theory," and I want to suggest that user friendly theory might require, as Ramsay and Rockwell suggest, a sense of non-transparency in regards to computational tools and theoretical frameworks.

Given that *HyperLit* currently exists solely as a piece of speculative design/critical design fiction, there still remains a lot of work to be done. In the context of the "Long Now of *Ulysses* Exhibit," I think our project largely functions to reimagine how we might be able to read and imagine digitized literary works like *Ulysses*, and how new ways of understanding how we can read might draw new critical audiences into the literary conversation. With the exception of Mikka's, Laura's, and perhaps David's projects, I'm not entirely sure if any of the projects featured in the exhibit really tackle this question of what it's like to read *Ulysses*, nor do they really acknowledge the fact that *Ulysses* is a very difficult read that--to many people--seems entirely inaccesible and firmly within the realm of "academia." Before I go on, I should mention that I do not wish to criticize or invalidate the excellent work undertaken by my colleagues in 507. Rather, I want to suggest that *HyperLit*--despite the fact that it is a mere piece of speculation--provides a unique contribution to the exhibit in that it asks and tackles some of the questions and problems about engaging new audiences through digital texts and environments, and investigating how we might imagine digital tools that explore and make "user friendly"the critical theories and frameworks that inform them.

##Expectations and Surprises Along the Way 
-----------------

From where we started out, our project ended up changing drastically. At first we had the idea of incorporating Geocaching into the project—an idea that was, quite quickly, dropped. Nina’s idea for incorporating a Google Calendar API function quite nicely sustained itself through the project in its entirety. However, outside of that, few of our original ideas in those first couple of weeks stuck around. Once the idea for a gameified social reader/reading environment came to light, though, the project managed to sustain its cohesion and essential components throughout the entire term/development. 

Regarding expectations, I think that in the early stages of our project we fully expected to have a working application come the semester’s end. This, of course did not (and probably could not have) happen. In that regard, then, our final product differs from our initial expectations. However, once we came around to the idea of prototyping an app, I think we had a good idea of what our final product would look like. In that regard, then, I think the product that we have now (the wireframes and speculative design video) for the most part matches the expectations (and, in some ways, exceeds them) that we had way back in late January. 

Specifically, I think both Nina and I are quite happy with the wireframes. Despite some obvious limitations, Balsamiq proved to be a very effective tool in making the wireframes happen. From a prospective usability perspective, I’m quite happy with how our wireframes turned out, and think that they really do provide a good idea of how the app would look and function. In that sense, then, I think our final wireframes really did meet our expectations. What’s more, the rather late addition of the Joyce Bot helped meet our expectations with bringing the critical foundation and framework of the project to light—-something that we had difficulty with along the way. We were a bit let down by Balsamiq when it came to incorporating the Joyce Bot (because of formatting, transparency etc), but it ended up being a quick fix in Photoshop. The Bot brought out the satire and critical elements quite well, and I think that, in the end, the wireframes did everything we wanted them to do. 

In terms of surprises or expectations not met, I think that in some ways our video did not do all it could have. We were hoping to create a speculative design video not unlike the video work done by students of Axel Roesler at the University of Washington (see [this](https://vimeo.com/38522403] and [this](https://vimeo.com/21179030))—videos that show quite clearly, I think, the usability and significance of a prototype. Another way to phrase this, then, is to suggest that we wanted to create a piece of “design fiction” (Lukens and DiSalvo), a video that “highlights prototypes through video of use scenarios instead of through working models or prototypes” (Lukens and DiSalvo 25). To be sure, in some ways I think we achieved this: the *HyperLit* video does, to a degree, show how the app would work. At the same time, I think some really key elements from the video are missing: the social-reading aspect (to echo your comments, Jentery, the video does certainly reinforce the isolated reader paradigm), and the app’s critical framework/critique of Web 2.0 and the attention economy. To be fair, the video was never a central theme of our project, so it might not be fair to compare our short video to some of the other speculative design video work (including video’s from Roesler’s class) that we looked at early in the semester. Additionally, we created the video pretty late in the term so, as a consequence of time, I think we jumped on the first storyboard idea that we had. Still, the [end product](http://vimeo.com/63042384) looked good, and I’ m especially happy with how the animations turned out (and learned something in the process--they took me a really freaking long time). I would be interested in revisting the video at some point to really make hit the points we may have missed. 

##Future Development
---------------------
In terms of future development, the first step will likely take place in the 2013/2014 academic year. This summer, both Nina and I will be taking the “Gaming for Humanists” course at the DHSI. Following this, we will both be taking a version of English 509 that combines the theory and critical practices explored in the “Gaming for Humanists” course with physical computing as taught and supervised by Jentery Sayers and Ray Siemens. While our work in the summer might not specifically pertain to *HyperLit*, I think both the DHSI and 509 will provide a valuable set of critical and physical skills that will be put to good use in *HyperLit’s* developmental future. 

In addition the content learned in the DHSI course In 2013/2014, Nina and I will both be involved with the ETCL funded discussion group “Gameful Employments.” Working with Stephen Ross, Alex Christie, Bruce Gooch, David Leach and many others, “Gameful Employments” will be an excellent opportunity to collaboratively work with a wide range of thinkers and builders to further develop and explore the possibilities of *HyperLit* and, hopefully, to begin making steps in the direction of development. Given that this discussion group will incorporate individuals from a wide range of backgrounds, it will be very useful to receive feedback on the pragmatics of building the project itself from discussion members who might be involved in fields such as Computer Science. 

Outside of the “Gameful Employments” discussion group, further development of HyperLit really depends upon funding. Because neither Nina or I have developed or coded a game before, we would likely have to look to others to help build it. This would, of course, require funding. Funding could come from a variety of places; academia, industry or, as a last resort, a KickStarter campaign. Given how well the project has been received and how interested we are in the material, I think Nina and I are both really keen to actually make the project happen, so the future development aspect of our project is something we are both taking quite seriously.   

##Data Model for *HyperLit*
-------------

The majority of our data can be found within our wireframes. This really did compose the majority of our project, so the bulk of our data consists of different iterations/versions of the wireframes. Below, I have arranged them (via link) beginning with the earliest to latest, with the last link being our final set of wireframes for the exhibit/507 project.

First, I think it is worth showing the original pen and paper [drawings](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/Logs/MockupSketches001.jpg) for our wireframes. This was very early in the process, and really just concerns the Google Calendar aspect. But, in terms of looking at the developmental history of the project is worth looking at, I think. 

[Version 1.0](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/jonjohns/English507/Logs/IterationOne.md)

Version 1.0 of the wireframes was our frst complete set of wireframes. These were the wireframes that we presented at "Games Without Frontiers." Obviously, the biggest change we made after Version 1.0 was the inclusion of the Joyce Bot, and some aesthetic tweaks. The basic useability of the app is intact within this version, and it gives a good sense of how the app would work. Of course, without the Bot, it is arguably lacking that ellusive "critical framework." Still, these were a pretty polished version that included the badge and comic animations made by Jasmine Nielsen, and, as a result, gave a good idea of the "feel" of the app.  

[Version 2.0](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/HyperLit/HyperLitWireframesBot.md)

In describing Version 2.0, I'll briefly outline each wireframe. This was, of course, our final wireframe "product." All animations are included--including the Joyce Bot--and there are some aesthetic tweaks to make it look a bit less "Windows 98ish." 

The first wire frame is, of course, the (welcome page)[https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/WelcomeScreenImages.png]. I made the earliest iteration of this wireframe, with Nina making some later tweaks. I put the finishing touches on it by adding the images drawn by Jasmine Nielsen--our cartoonist! The welcome page functions to give a quick explanation of how the app works, complete with a short description of how the app can fit in (or fit itself in) to one's everyday life ("Don't know where to start when reading literary texts? HyperLit provides an environment that helps you tackle all of these challenges.") The welcome page also--briefly--introduces some of the cultural critical elements of the app ("we will help you make time to read and get away from the work/sleep cycle we all tend to get stuck in"). 

The second wireframe in the series is the [signup page](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/SignUp.png). Again, this was Nina's doing. Nothing much to explain, just a signup page that I think any internet user will have seen before. 

The third wireframe is the [Google Calendar link page](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/GoogleCal.png). Essentially, this gives the viewer an idea of how the app would link to a user's Google Calendar through an API. This frame shows the "alert" that would come up, asking the user for permission. It should be noted that for future reference we should include a "manual" schedule input screen, due to the fact that not everyone has or uses Google Calendar. I acknowledge that problem in a log that can be found [here](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/Logs/JohnsonLogMarch11.md). 

The third wireframe is the [Integrated Calendar page](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/IntegratedCal.png). This page shows how the app would find gaps in a user's day where they could be reading. Again, this was Nina's wireframe. Note the "attention ratio" graph in the sidebar, showing the user the ratio between hyper and deep attention throughout the week (IE: how much time is devoted to reading vs "hyper attentive" activities). 

The fourth wireframe is the [Web Comic Visualization](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/New/BotCalendarONE.png). This frame essentially visualizes a user's day through comic illustrations that pertain to certain categories (eating, commuting, working out, working, meetings, lunch dates etc). This element of the design is intended to bring out the satirical/critical elements of the app, with the intention of providing a set of illustrations that really highlights the cyclical and labour-centered daily existence of the user. Reading time, of course, is represented as a kind of escape from this, and we see in this frame how the user--reading--is in another "world" that is very different from his own. I designed this page and incorporated all images. The Bot, of course, makes his first appearance here. Again, the Bot is meant to really bring out the satirical element of the app. Here, we see our Joyce Bot commenting on our user's alloted time to eating breakfast. Note the quotation from Calypso. Ideally, the bot would pull different quotes from *Ulysses* (preferably from a section in proximity to the one in progress by the user). Also note the "Choose a Challenge" button--an element so far unexplored in the wireframes. Essentially, users would have the option of joining different challenges that would appear at different times of the year (IE: the "Reading Break Marathon!" challenge, where a reader is challenged to read as many pages as possible in 5 days.) 

The fifth wireframe is the [Time to read/In Browser Reading frame](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/New/AlertReadingTimeBOT.png). This wireframe serves two functions: it shows how the Joyce Bot would appear on either a web browsing device or mobile device to remind users of a scheduled reading, while also demonstrating how the in-browser reaidng screen would look. Note the reading screen and the annotation window. The annotation window, of course, showcases scholarly and community annotations as defined by the annotation legend. Nina designed the original layout of this wireframe, while I incorporated the images, text, and icons.

The sixth wireframe is the [InBrowser Reading Screen without bot frame](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/New/InBrowserReadingBOT.png). Essentially, this just gives a clearer view of the reading screen. Note the snarky comment made by our Joyce Bot in the corner regarding the reader's inability to ever know anything. Nina designed this frame, I inserted the bot/text/icons. 

The seventh wireframe is the [fullscreen reading screen](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/FullScreenCleanMode.png). This shows the optional reading screen for those who want an uncluttered reading experience (similar to Zen mode on GitHub). This frame was my doing. 

The eighth wireframe shows the [invisible elements](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/ReadingFullScreen.png) of the fullscreen reading mode. Essentially, it incorporates all of the elements of the inbrowser reader, but are made invisibile unless hovered over. Annotations would then float as a kind of pop-up. The rectangles on either side of the page, when clicked on, would change pages. I designed this frame. 

The ninth wireframe is the [reading feedback](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/SessEndResponse.png) page. Here, user's can provide feedback, reflections, questions etc on the reading just finished. If the reader made annotations during the reading process, they would be documented here. I made this wireframe. 

The tenth wireframe is the [reading summary](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/SessEndReadingSummary.png) page. Here, the reader's "data" from the reading will be shown/visualized. We can see that the "pages per minute" graph is shown, while there is the option to switch to an "annotations per page" stat graph or a "points earned per page" graph. At the top of the page, of course, is a break down of a reader's activity during the reading, with a points total on the right. While this data would be quantified to determine user level and achievemets, it would also--ideally--provide longterm data for visualizing a reader's changing reading habits over long periods of time. I designed this wireframe. 

The eleventh wireframe is the [weekly summar](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/SessEndWeeklySummary.png) page. Essentially, this is the same as the reading summary, but instead visualizes the reader's progress over the week. 

The next wireframe is the [Achievements/All Time Stats page](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/New/BADGEWALLBOT1.png). This page demonstrates the user's all time stats (on the right), reader level, social stats (friends, annotations made, discussion garnered etc), and--of course--badges and achievements earned. Badges are, of course, awarded for a variety of things: chapters completed or reading habits (re: the "lunchtime reader award" or the "consistency award"), for example. We see the Joyce bot here, of course, who provides a nice snide remark on the reader's latest achievement. The fact of the matter is is that being awarded badges for reading *Ulysses* denotes an interest in cultural capital. Again, part of this project revolves around critiquing gamification using gamificaton (!), and the Bot, in part, relays the contrivedness of reading for badges. I designed this wireframe, with Jasmine contributing illustrations. 

The thirteenth wireframe is the [NewsFeed page](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/New/NewsFeedBOT.png). The NewsFeed is an important element of the social aspect of *HyperLit*. The feed should look somewhat familiar--essentially it relays information on what a user's friends are doing. A quick profile is provided of each user, showing latest achievements, pages read, sections read, annotations made, and points earned. Users can give kudos to other users and comment on activity. Also note the "Quick Stats" bar on the left, giving a quick breakdown of the user's latest activity and upcoming reading time. Lastly, note the Joyce Bot, who joins us here to comment upon the user's process of "idly" reading his/her "News[feed] baton." I designed this frame. 

The last wireframe is the [leaderboard](https://raw.github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/master/English507/IterationOne/HyperLitRevisedWireframes/LeaderBoard.png). The leaderboard would add another element to the social element of the app. The leaderboard will provide a list of a user's friends, and order them according to a number of different factors like total time read, pages read, annotations made, or progress percentage. Note that some users have over 100%. Ideally, *HyperLit* is to be an app that will reward rereading, in which case further points/achievements could be unlocked and earned. 

*A note on Data Handling*
In terms of handling the data (images and wireframes--we were each working on seperate computers), Nina and I primarily utilized DropBox to share data. This was super effective, especially when it came to sharing animations during the process of editing the video. All of our images, animations, bmml files (editable Balsamiq format), concept photos/storyboards, and "project assets" were stored in the shared *HyperLit* folder in Dropbox. Of course, in order to upload the necessary documentation/data to GitHub we created a "HyperLit Documentation" Folder within the 507 "Log" repository. That folder can be found [here](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/tree/master/English507/Logs/HyperLitDocumentation). 


##Works Cited
---------------------------------

Beller, Jonathan. "Paying Attention." *Cabinet* 24 (2006/2007): n.pag. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Bogost, Ian. “Gamification is Bullshit.” *Bogost.com*. Bogost.com, 8 Aug. 2011. Web. 10 Dec. 2012.

Hayles, N. Katherine. "Hyper and Deep Attention: The Generational Divide in Cognitive Modes." *Profession* 13 (2007): 187-199. Web. 10 Apr. 2013.

Liu, Alan. “Where is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities.” Ed. Matthew K. Gold.
Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2012. 490-509. Print.

Lukens, Jonathan, and Carl DiSalvo. “Speculative Design and Technological Fluency.”
*International Journal of Learning and Media* 3.4 (2011): 23–40. Web. 2 Apr. 2013.

Ramsay, Stephen, and Geoffrey Rockwell. “Developing Things: Notes Toward an Epistemology
of Building in the Digital Humanities.” Ed. Matthew K. Gold. *Debates in the Digital
Humanities.* Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2012. 75-84. Print.

Rockwell, Geoffrey. "Serious Play at Hand: Is Gaming Serious Research in the Humanities?"
*Text Technology 12* (2003): 89-99. Web. 10 Dec. 2012.

Winslow-Yost, Gabriel. "Simcity's Evil Twin." *The New Yorker*, 11 April. 2013. Web. 11 April 2013. 


