# Ulysses Sonic Ephemeris
##Ephemeris: sound bank responding to bodies in space
by Mitch Renaud
    
Sound is inherently ephemeral as it is always already engaged in decay. By (re-)sounding sonic ephemera from and adjacent to Ulysses, I will create a space where the viewer/listener is encouraged to linger and play with sounds of Joyce's novel through their position in the exhibit. 
  
## How this is becoming that
  
My contribution to *The Long Now of Ulysses* is to develop a sound installation that reacts to auditors’ locations in the exhibit space and hopefully prompts them to think about the role of sound in space and space in sound as well as the ephemeral nature of sound in everyday life in relation to the novel. In part, I chose to have the sounds experienced in this way—rather than through a simple playback method like a CD player—in order to highlight Joyce’s commitment to rendering the everyday spaces of Dublin (and the people and objects within them), as well as to the ways in which sound marks and orients the experience of space. Audience members will experience four layers of sonic ephemera that can be activated by approaching a panel: short sounds that appear in the text excerpt; speech of the excerpt being read (or of Joyce reading); period performances of music from the novel; and longer ambient soundscapes. All four layers won’t necessarily be triggered upon each approach, and there are multiple files in each register. The listener is encouraged to approach a panel and see what they get, go away, and then come back and hear some more. I will start out by tracing my project’s trajectory before discussing the supporting art works and critical framework. 
  
[Demo Video](https://drive.google.com/#folders/0B4FPrxurDAEzOTNWMmJOMk80bWs)
    
Setting out on my first sound installation was exciting, and I quickly got wrapped up in the possibilities of the medium. Coming from a background as a composer writing for acoustic instruments, as well as some electro acoustic works, I was looking forward to a new form of practice and way of working. After spending time with Ryo Ikeshiro at the Toronto Electro Acoustic Symposium, I was interested in the possibilities of interactive installations such as his [Pulse Cubes](http://vimeo.com/9361781), where the audience manipulates sound by playing with and arranging black cubes. In the first [needs assessment](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/83b793a9076d11e7f6d7f85ccf816d94bb7e3f9f/English507/NeedsAssessment/Renaudm1NeedsAssessment.md) I began thinking about different ways that audience members could interact with the installation, starting with one active (some sort of tactile manipulation of objects) and two passive points of interaction (the audience’s positioning in space and the volume of their conversations), all while having some set process going on in the background. Each of these points of interaction would trigger some action in the installation processing the audio, switching what files are playing, or positioning the sounds in space etc. 
  
I eventually realized that I would have more than enough to do by scaling the project back to a single means of interaction, so that the audience member’s approach would started a stream of shuffling audio clips related to each panel. The question of what content would occupy the installation still remained, and in the first log I considered whether to take up the long now element with responses from fifties avant-garde composers such as Luciano Berio, John Cage, Pierre Boulez (who all have works directly engaging with the novel or reference it as a major influence to their thinking). The process of writing the log answered that question, because using their work could open “a line of thought that could easily overshadow the sounds from the novel.” In addition to highlighting the novel’s soundscape, allowing a single point of interaction ensured that the sound installation would not overshadow the other components of the exhibit. But I was still left with a [data model](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0AoFPrxurDAEzdHY2elV5UTJ2SnA2NG43V2drbExOb1E#gid=0) that did not generate enough sounds to work with. In preparation for my first iteration, I begin to explore the options of historical audio and settled on including the two existing recording of Joyce reading as levels of audio in the exhibit: one from 1924 of him reading from Aeolus and another from 1929 of his reading from *Finnegans Wake*, as well as the 1982 Bloomsday RTÉ radio production.. But I was still unsure about how to monitor the space visually, which was solved by the decision to collaborate with Gabrielle Odowichuk. My March 14th meeting with her was the point that really allowed my project to take a concrete form and move forward. In describing what I wanted, we were able to refine how the audio fit into four layers, that two xBox Kinects would be the best way to take the visual input of the bodies in space, and how the Max patch might be organized.
  
[Sketches 1](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzSndlbUJ6NUVqdlk/edit?usp=sharing)
[Sketches 2](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzMG0wLXQ5VGF0THc/edit?usp=sharing)
[Sketches 2](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzaHZMcXZsR3RkNDA/edit?usp=sharing)
[Sketches 4](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzcGxxRUdEUTRwWnM/edit?usp=sharing)
[Gab Meeting 1](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzSHo3RXd3OGx4TGM/edit?usp=sharing)
[Gab Meeting 2](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzVmZkcFlmVEtDeFE/edit?usp=sharing)
[Screen Grab from Max Patch](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzNUtwcnljYlJ3WTQ/edit?usp=sharing)
[Speaker Layout](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzd0hvUEk0NDBmVkU/edit?usp=sharing)
 
The handwritten documentation above shows the productivity of the evening; Gabrielle offered to take the role of coding the program that would monitor the two xBox Kinects and send the information to the Max patch. Collaborating with her took some of the weight off compiling the archive of sounds, conceptualizing the installation, and realizing the coding. From that meeting, I developed the schematic of how the speakers would be laid out in the space and where the Kinects would need to be mounted in order to read the exhibit space. Also above is a screen-grab of the beginnings of the Max/MSP patch. The 17 sliders at the top of the patch will feed a value between 0 and 127 to the 17 lines of audio, organized into 3 groups that feed two speakers and a pair of speakers that blends three panels. The groups organizing the speakers also collect the audio files for each panel, which are divided into the four registers in the subpatch hub seen above. What remains is complete the Max/patch and continue to fill out the sound-bank. Zaqir’s project [*Demisemiquavers: The Long Notes of Ulysses*](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/Portfolio/viraniPortfolio.md) has provided a starting point for the sourcing of an audio archive, but the different intentions of the collections limits the sounds that can be taken from his archive. One thing I have realized is that creating an archive and creating a new aesthetic work around it is far too much to undertake in twelve weeks. But it is getting there. I will continue to add to the sound bank, processing the remaining 76 radio clips and adding to the historical recordings, as well as realizing the max patch. What I am considering is working only with the two registers of audio, the spoken radio broadcast and the period music,  in part because of the coming launch and because I am questioning the effect of ambient sounds to the listener. The radio broadcast does have some sound effects and I worry that adding variable soundscapes and short sounds referenced in the excerpts may make the installation too distracting from the other components of the exhibit. The question is whether the two registers alone will be able to adequately explore conceptual questions about the role of space in sounding and the everydayness of the novel.
  
[data](https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0B4FPrxurDAEzMHhkSWZKMHprenM&usp=sharing)
  
While the development of the work was taking place, I was also engaged in preparing a paper for [Shifting Positions — Writing the Materialities of Sound,](http://www.acla.org/acla2013/shifting-positions-writing-materialities-of-sound/) a workshop panel at the American Comparative Literature Association’s annual general meeting. The paper started by considering what it would mean to think of sound and music as an object. Where does this object sit in the difference between incorporeal and corporeal? How do non-human objects enter and contribute to a dynamic system — made up of parts that are wholes in themselves — enmeshed the event of sounding? After the paper was sent off, I continued in a similar line of thought in a essay that focused on Edison’s first recording with the phonograph, asking what it means to think of sound as a body — existing with a simultaneous actual and virtual domain — marked by the aporias of its (im)materiality and (in)corporeality and its constant passing into ephemerality. 
  
[Ontological Schematic of Body of Sound](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B4FPrxurDAEzbkIzVWlvb3lLN3M/edit?usp=sharing)
    
These papers influenced the development of the piece because they allowed me to begin to unravel what it means to be working with sounds that decayed in the 1920’s — or that never existed — and to re-body them in a gallery space in Victoria. In any space, sound as mechanical energy passes through material bodies, yet cannot be reduced to the material of these bodies, forming an ephemeral resonant community inhabited by all kinds of bodies. The key points are the awareness of the importance of bodies in space in sounding, and the ways in which space ensures that any repetition produces a new body of sound, one that attempts to become the past body but can never fully coincide with it; the original is not repeatable because it is divorced from the original space and the bodies that surface its interior. I started thinking about the media archeology of Wolfgang Ernst as a critical context for this exhibit but quickly realized that his work doesn’t address the problem of space, whereas I formed this piece as a means to think through the importance of space. In his article “Towards a Media Archaeology of Sonic Articulations,” Ernst makes a distinction between two interlaced levels of perceived sound: *the sonic,* determined in part by cultural engineering; and *the acoustic,* comprised of the physical and technical laws of physics. Taking the example of an ancient Greek monochord, he asserts that playing it allows us to “share and participate in the original discovery of musicological knowledge because — in an almost Derridean sense (as expressed in his *Grammatology*)—  the original experience is repeatable; the actual experiment allows for (com)munication across the temporal gap.” [176-77] Ernst wants to focus on the acoustic domain of sound to get access to the sound as such, but his method brackets the cultural domain of the sonic, which has the knowledge of how, when, or in what space that monochord was played: was there a plectrum? At what angle do we hold our hands? We cannot answer these questions without the extinct cultural knowledge and context that Ernst wants to subordinate to his fetishized sound-in-itself. The issue of bracketing the performance practice of instruments does not detract from Ernst’s main focus on media studying media, because technology does enable access to aspects otherwise unavailable to human study. However, a media archeology of sound will always be limited by the impossibility of replicating or capturing all aspects of space, which blocks full knowledge of the original sound in the Derridean sense. We cannot replicate the space of sounding, and therefore we can never replicate the original, which is coloured by the other material bodies it resonates with, reflects off, or is absorbed by as it travels through space. I set out to explore this limit of media archaeology through the exhibit, highlighting the impossibility of capturing the space of Dublin as well as the aporia of re-sounding ephemera.

Interestingly, it took me until near the end of the semester to realize fully the main artistic reference point of this project, [Angela Grauerholz’s](http://www.gallery.ca/grauerholz/en/) archival works [*Reading Room of the Working Artist*](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mx16TSV49do&feature=player_embedded) and [*At Work At Play*](http://www.atworkandplay.ca/). *Reading Room of the Working Artist* lays out eight themed monographs for viewers to peruse. Each collects images and texts that have influenced or interested Grauerholz over the years. In *At Work At Play* she extends the idea of aestheticized archives by mobilizing a collection of over four thousand images, videos, and texts to do with the history of modernism and allows the user to produce a visualization in the form of a “memory palace,” marking their individual movement through the database. With these two works, she is mobilizing archival material to create a new aesthetic experience, which I find fascinating. After seeing these works, I began what now emerges as a series of works *We All Exist in Moments (only some are made for dancing)* [2010], *Even Ballerinas can be Crushed by Cities* [2010/11], *Breathing Patterns and the Differences Between…* [2011], *Discom.Mimifority.Sincertcry (…perpetual immersion in being…)* [2011], and *You.We.I.* [2012] that all use sampled, borrowed, or archival material as their starting point. What I have been trying to do with these, in a less systematized way, is explore the re-use of material in new aesthetic experiences. *Ulysses Sonic Ephemeris* is a first attempt at exploring the possibilities of archives as appropriated aesthetic bodies. As I put it in the first version of my needs assessment, “I want to attempt to create an aesthetic object that enables (forces?) viewers to think with (or just engage with) the exhibit rather than listen passively.” The desire to create aesthetic objects to promote thought can be frustrated by the difficulties and limits of working with concert music as a medium for thought; working with archival materials allows a greater depth of meaning to be made visible, and that has been an undercurrent to the development of this project.
  
## Dear log, struggles with working method
  
In her Lansdowne lecture, “Praxis Makes Perfect: New Models for Learning in the Humanities” [Bethany Nowviskie](http://nowviskie.org/) begins with Aristotle’s three types of knowledge: *theoria* (contemplation), *praxis* (action or doing), and *poiesis* (making). She goes on to discuss how [The Praxis Network](http://praxis-network.org/) is working to find ways out of the current state of *dyspraxia* (bad practice) in the humanities to *eupraxia* (good practice) of making work visibile (in both process and product) and of training humanities scholars to better prepare them for careers outside of academia. If we think about digital humanities (DH) as a way to combine knowing or theory and doing or praxis, the third category of knowledge is either forgotten or blocked: poiesis, which can be understood merely as production, or expanded into a way of knowing in line with Aristotelian aesthetics and the sensible. Every action—be it giving a talk, writing a paper, designing and modelling an object, or coding a website—has aesthetic dimensions both in how it is perceived, and in the conceptual frame that shapes the choices made in the process of doing. Suddenly we are engaging all three: theory as contemplation, the action of praxis, and the poiesis considering how the realization of praxis is perceived or the aesthetic experience of thoughts and actions. I would like to find a medium and method to support the simultaneous or adjacent realization of these three ways of knowing, and this installation has been a step in this direction.

At the present moment and in its current form, I am unhappy with this project. But does that mean that it has been a failure? Yes and no. It has failed insofar as I think I could have (and would like to have) delivered a more matured and nuanced project; the iteration mounted in the library will be an effective aesthetic engagement with the literary text that merges theory, praxis and poiesis — so in this regards it will be a success. But it won’t be up to the standard that I would like it to be: which is common enough in any practice, but still disappointing. Nonetheless,  I find personal success in the project because its quasi-failure has forced me to confront issues and challenges in workflow, method, and process that I have been struggling with for sometime. In *Give my Regards to Eighth Street*, American composer Morton Feldman says he realized that he was going to be a professional composer when he first became practical. Practicality took the form of copying his music neatly, keeping his desk tidy, and all of the seemingly unimportant things that make all the difference. Practicality brings us closer to the work rather than encouraging a network of ideas that keeps us outside of it. [Feldman, 63] Something that I need and want to develop is a workflow that better accommodates the benefits of the design methodologies explored in this course (iterations, logs, workflows, data modelling etc.) while allowing the space that artistic work demands; giving the freedom and flexibility to explore, feel out, and, as Feldman puts it, get closer to the work. To put it in the form of a question: can we achieve the freedom, space, and intimacies that poiesis requires while structuring work to be productive and interoperable in a collaborative context? I think we can; I just have not been able to pull it off yet.
   
My practice as a composer often begins in structural sketches and systems that are later abandoned through anxieties and frustrations as I feel out the material. It has been interesting to observe these anxieties and frustrations following me into this form of practice. One system I setup in the development of this installation aided in the selection of excerpts of the 108 tracks from the 1982 Bloomsday RTÉ radio production. I modified the algorithm used to select the text excerpts for the exhibit: I selected 4, 6, 16, and 22 as important numbers because *Ulysses* is set on June 16th 1904 and was published in 1922. If I was editing an odd numbered clip I would begin the excerpt selection from 4 minutes in and grab 22 seconds for the sound bank; if the audio clip was even, I would select from 6 minutes in and take 16 seconds. In practice, this process became a starting point or way of deciding between two rather uninteresting selections. The number of clips per section was determined by how the radio-broadcast separated the tracks on the CDs. I quickly gravitated to determining the length by the natural phrasing and attempted to take clips around 30 seconds. If I took too take a hard line on the algorithm's time selection, I ended up cutting into words, and even if I went as close as possible without splitting words, the excerpts generated would often stand out as nonsensical. In the context of a collaborative exhibit rather than a solo presentation, if the voice whispering in your ear is saying bizarre things it will be harder to tune it out if you so desire. Another benefit of not taking a hard line with the algorithm is that I could choose to generate meaningful excerpts that work along with the other objects in the exhibit, and against the often over exaggerated difficultly of reading the novel that stops many people from engaging with it meaningfully. These decisions are the points where poiesis steps up to better facilitate collaboration and interoperability; an example of the flexibility in the design structure, which needs to be maintained.
  
The surprising problems I encountered in adapting to design methods involved getting stuck in planning how the work would be done, rather than struggling through the work itself, which I describe in [iteration one:](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/IterationOne/Renaudm1IterationOne.md)
  
“I’ve been startled by my reaction to data modelling and some of the points dealing with systematization of working process. In my artistic practice as a composer, I've endlessly envied artists with visual based practices as they seem to have a much cleaner workflow. For example thinking about Gerhard Richter who tells his assistants two weeks in advance that he'll be coming into the studio to paint and what colours, size canvas etc. he wants. They prepare his materials and he comes in and paints. I've found myself pushing back against my own attempts to better clarify my working  processes ahead of time to the point of having to step back from the project for a couple of weeks to clear my head. I think it's a matter more of adapting to a new way of working and finding what points I can build more flexibly in.” 
  
Again, I think I can learn to work within a design framework, but it has been a challenge and surprise to need to think through the workflow of the work before I get into pulling apart what the work actually is. I think it was this meta-tension between generating the form of working in order to generate the form and content of the work that cause dazed stumbling and retreat, slowing the work the most. I do not intend to highlight these struggles in the hopes of eliminating them from my process, because I think it is important to realize and remember that these difficulties are an integral part of that process; instead, I hope that by making them visible I can continue to work through them. 
  
In summary, does design methodology create a network of ideas to keep us outside of the work? Put another, blunter way: do these methods promote a Fordist factory production line aesthetic? And, if this is the case, does this aesthetic force a cold removal from the work, potentially blocking poiesis in favour of the realization of *theoria* through the praxis of production?  How can we work simultaneously within all three of Aristotle’s forms of knowing?
  
## All the places it can go
  
The long now of this project lies in further exploring the idea of an archive being re-purposed with some form of aesthetic mediation and how installation and sound art can be used to further research on the materiality of sound. I think this was a good first step in taking up the influence of Angela Grauerholz, but with adequate time to build (or source) an archive and develop a new form of presentation I can create a more mature work that strengthens (and makes visible) connections between *theoria*, *praxis*, and *poiesis*.

## Bibliography
  
Ernst, Wolfgang. *Digital Memory and the Archive*. Translated and Edited by Jussi 
Parikka, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

—. “Media Archaeography: Method and Machine verus History and Narrative of Media,” in *Media Archeology: Approaches, Applications, and Implications*, Edited by. Erkki Huhtamo and Jussi Parikka. Berkley: University of California Press, 2011.

Feldman, Morton. *Give my Regards to Eighth Street*. New York:Exact Change, 2004.

Kim-Cohen, Seth. *In the Blink of an Ear: Toward a Non-Cochlear Sonic Art*. New York: Continuum, 2009. 

Kahn, Douglas. *Noise Water Meat: A History of Sound in the Arts*. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2001

Kittler, Friedrich A. *Gramophone, Film, Typewriter*. Translated by Geoffrey Winthrop-Young and Michael Wutz. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999.

Stern, Jonathan. *MP3 The Meaning of a Format*. Durham: Duke University Press, 2012

—. *The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound Reproduction*. Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2003.
