# DESCRIPTION

Digital literary studies (DLS) are frequently associated with not only the production and interpretation of literature through computational means but also an investment in how literature changes both with and through digital culture, networks, and collaborations. For instance, Alan Liu claims that—in DLS—“everything old and new is up for grabs again,” as scholars, artists, and an array of publics negotiate the tensions between imagination and simulation, writing and encoding, reading and browsing, mimesis and modelling, and publication and transmission. Since this seminar is an introduction to DLS, it gives students opportunities to explore a variety of methods and perspectives, and it is intended for students who are absolutely new to—and even skeptical of—digital humanities. The seminar’s design assumes that digital literary studies (in particular) and digital humanities (in general) are best understood through tacit knowledge production and praxis. Such an assumption means that we will combine knowing and doing, resisting the prevalent-but-fallacious divide between the technical and theoretical, digital and analog media, handiwork and mental labour, bodies and information.

More specifically, we will be collaborating as a group to prototype, test, implement, and publish a single project: a distributed literary exhibit located, in part, in the UVic’s McPherson Library. This process will involve our collaborating with other faculty and graduate students as well as librarians, para-academics, and a variety of web-oriented and local audiences. We have no choice. The exhibit must go live, just in time for Congress 2013 at the UVic. Nevertheless, its design, content, materiality, and modes of expression and delivery are yet to be determined. What we do have is infrastructure, interest, and support. And by the semester’s end, each of you will be named a co-curator of the exhibit, having contributed a component of it and—in the process—learning methodologies anchored in the modelling, versioning, visualization, curation, and expression of data. That said, the seminar affords a significant degree of creative and critical license on your part, balanced by the collective expectation that you document your process, reflect on your contributions, and consider how the exhibit will function after English 507. In so doing, I will request that you repeatedly ask the following questions of and for digital literary studies: what are the practices of culture in our “digital” moment? By whom? For whom? Under what assumptions? And to what effects on the interpretation and trajectories of both literature and literary criticism? 

Technical competencies assumed by this seminar: That you know how to send an email.