#*HyperLit*: Gameful Design for an Open-Access Social Edition
##Created by Nina Belojevic and Jon Johnson 

Links will be here? 

-------------

  The current iteration of *HyperLit* consists of a wireframe-based prototype and a speculative design-fiction video. Together, the wireframes and video offer a model for the expected use of the app, while also highlighting the critical ideas framing and informing *HyperLit*. As demonstrated by the wireframes and video, *HyperLit* is a social reading environment that uses gameful design to encourage player engagement and participation, while also presenting a self-reflexive framework that encourages critical awareness of the environment it inhabits: Web 2.0 and the digital economy. By combining these critical and interactive elements, *HyperLit* functions as an argument in the form of a prototype that offers a critique of current socioeconomic hierarchies, the academy, Web 2.0, and gamification, while simultaneously operating within these spaces to encourage critical awarenesses of the problematic ideologies and frameworks that inform these technologies and institutions. 
	
The basic user flow of the app consists of the following steps:

1. *HyperLit* is a mobile-optimized, browser-based app that contains digital editions of literary texts.
2. Users sign up with their Google account.
3. The app integrates with Google Calendar and identifies “free”/leisure time slots during which the player could be reading. If players do not have a Google account, they can input their schedule manually. 
4. For each day, the app generates a web-comic visualization of the user’s day to satirically draw attention to the daily activities that the player engages in.
5. The selected text (for the purpose of our prototype, James Joyce’s *Ulysses*) is accessible as a digital edition in the app environment. When a reading time is coming up,  the player will receive a pop-up reminder.
6. While reading, the player has access to relevant links and related content, scholarly annotations, and community annotations (by other players). Additionally, the player can add line-specific comments or respond to other players’ comments.
7. At the end of each reading session, the player can see a number of visualizations showing his/her performance, stats, achievements, and earned badges. Achievements and badges are earned for a variety of activities, including time spent reading, consistency in following the reading schedule, number of comments added, other players’ engagement with comments, and time spent close reading or rereading passages. All of these activities can help reach specific achievements (e.g. chapter completion awards) or to earn badges (e.g. a close-reading badge). Additionally, all activities earn the player points, which accumulate to determine the player’s reading level (e.g. casual reader, advanced reader, scholarly reader, etc.). Players who reach the scholarly reader level have extended access to create and peer review scholarly annotations that will be marked as such in the digital edition. Finally, the app will track reading behaviours and statistics not only as a part of the quantified data/self trend, but also to gather behavioural data in order to build algorithmic reading functions and to encourage self-reflexivity of reading habits within the player.

In addition to the basic user flow, an integrated James Joyce “Bot” creates another level of interaction. As indicated in the wireframes and the video, a Joyce Bot will appear at random points in the user’s experience to offer critical and somewhat sarcastic commentary on the user’s behaviour and on Ulysses. Through this form of commentary, the Bot adds a level of satire to the app environment, while also allowing for the computational aspects of the Bot to “learn” over time and become more characterized and customized throughout the reading experience.
  
The *HyperLit* model intends to create a critical, self-reflexive, and satirical environment that offers an alternate way of engaging with content within the cultural and digital spaces that it is critical of. The calendar integration and visualization of the player’s day aims to create awareness of the labour cycle common in the current socioeconomic infrastructure described by Jonathan Beller (“Paying Attention” and The Cinematic Mode of Production).  The binaries of play/work and entertainment/learning raise another area of critique that the app aims to communicate: the concept of gamification (the use of gaming elements in non-gaming contexts). A common critique of video games and gamification in the digital economy is that play and labour often blend together, creating an environment of unpaid labour. This comes out even more strongly in gamification, which Ian Bogost sees as "exploitationware." Gamification is used to encourage certain forms of behaviour and engagement. However, *HyperLit* encourages engagement with an activity that has no value economically, bringing us to the second area in which these binaries are relevant: the academy. Normally perceived as reserved for the realm of academia, *HyperLit* makes readily available the spaces of studying and literary engagement, offering an accessible alternative for literary discussion and critical thinking to current academic infrastructures. The open structure of the app makes literary studies accessible to everyone, allowing for collaborative annotations and innovative forms of peer-to-peer review. What’s more, taking into consideration Katherine Hayles’ call to structure intellectual environments that incorporate the hyper and deep attention split in current generational demographics, the app demonstrates how an environment that does not strictly privilege either mode of attention may allow for a community-driven study of literature opposed to one contingent upon social, economic, and institutional privilege. Finally, *HyperLit* satirizes aspects of Web 2.0 by using the environment’s framework to engage users in common activities (socializing, commenting, browsing, reading, etc.), but with a focus on reading a completely different type of content. Leveraging the focus on sociability, immediacy, and attention that Web 2.0 offers, *HyperLit* uses behaviour that is familiar to encourage critical thinking and deep engagement with culture and history rather than mere consumption of content.
	
The *HyperLit* prototype offers a model that leverages gameful design in response to the current critical discourse around gamification, showing how a method that scholars are biased against may be used both as a form of critique of and as a solution to a number of socioeconomic, cultural, and institutional issues, hierarchies, and practices.
