#Dislocating Ulysses

#Project Description

This project will support three geotemporal representation of Ulysses and its networks. From a central page, users will be able to navigate to 1) an annotated and animated world map which highlights the appearance of as many of Ulysses’ afterlives -- from the 1967 American film adaptation, to the translation of “Ithaca” into Farsi, to the Modernist Versions Project’s “Year of Ulysses” -- as possible since 1922, providing both a database of international “product” inspired by the novel and a visualization of the novel’s spatial and temporal reach; 2) track the network of postal correspondance used by Joyce to gather information while composing the novel and 3) a display of historical maps of Dublin ranging from medieval Dublin to Dublin in the mid 20th century, including an animation of an early 19th century map that enlarges or shrinks the size of a given area on the map in relation to the amount of relative time the novel is situated in the particular area. 

This portion of the project rethinks a linear progression of both space and time by situating *Ulysses* in a past and present Dublin. In its deisign, the map seeks to generate anachronistic representations of geography, whose objective representation is unseated by the changing temporalities of Joyce’s novel, and visual ruptures in historical time, whose positivist movement forward is disrupted by the historical and political contexts surrounding Joyce’s novel (occuring both before and after its niitial publication). For the first segment, three historical maps of Dublin from the UVic’s Special collections, ranging from the medeival period to 1948, are layered to visualize the changing political and historical resonances of the locations covered in the novel. The second component of this segment represents the time spent in each location relative to the amount of time the novel is situated in specific ears of Dublin. Using a scanned image of Special Collection’s early 20th century Dublin map, the areas of Dublin are animated, using either Google Earth or Flash, to expand or contract in proportion to the narrative time spent in the area. The materials generated for the physical exhibit will then be located on the map, indicating where in Dublin the novel places the items on display and what temporal and historical contexts (intended by Joyce or not) surround them. The correspondances or anachronisms produced by the contact between elements of Joyce’s novel and the changing historical and political geography of Dublin will dislocate the exhibit material from the immediate context *Ulysses*, placing it in a longer, and less stable, history of the city.

#List of Materials
Software: Flash and/or Google Earth (possibly HyperCities)
Documents: Physical maps of Dublin in Special Collection (CODE), OCR of 1922 edition of Ulysses
Documentation: List of items for exhibit generated by 560 (including where they appear in Dublin), Tutorials for mapping software (Google Earth or Flash), details of micro maps 560 plans to generate and print for the exhibit space

##Bibliography
*[Lovecraft in Providence](http://lovecraft.scholarslab.org/neatline-exhibits/show/lovecraft-in-providence/fullscreen)
*[The Knotted Line](http://knottedline.com/) (for creating navigable, interactive environments), Alain Liu, “Transcendental Data”
[*Media *Archaeology*](http://books.google.ca/books?id=aSlQ8z1uslwC&printsec=frontcover&dq=media+archaeology&hl=en&sa=X&ei=FfQHUcicNcSQiALProGADQ&redir_esc=y) Ed. Erkki Huhtamo.
* Khadem, Amir. [“Annexing the unread: a close reading of 'distant reading’.”](http://link.springer.com.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca/article/10.1007/s11059-012-0152-y/fulltext.html) Neohelicon. 39:2 (2012). 
* MacDonagh, Donagh. ["Ulysses: Map of Dublin."](http://voyager.library.uvic.ca/vwebv/holdingsInfo?bibId=2619075) Dublin: Signa Ltd.: 1963. 
* Moretti, Franco. ["Conjectures on World Literature."](http://newleftreview.org/II/1/franco-moretti-conjectures-on-world-literature) New Left Review. Feb. 2000.
* Moretti, Franco. [Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History.](http://voyager.library.uvic.ca/vwebv/holdingsInfo?bibId=1386108) London: Verso. 2005.  
* Benjamin, Walter. ["On the Concept of History."](http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/benjamin/1940/history.htm) 
* [The Spatial Humanities: GIS and the Future of Humanities Scholarship.](http://voyager.library.uvic.ca/vwebv/holdingsInfo?bibId=2181054) Ed. David J. Bodenhamer, et al. Bloomington: Indiana UP. 2010.

#Scope
The project focuses on ptototyping and developing a map of Dublin that incorporates layered historical maps which distorts geographic space to visualize the temporality of each location in the novel. The map is ideally interactive, so that the temporal distortions and historical ruptures are generated dynamically by the user (à la the Knotted Line). Ensuring interoperability of our data and replicability of our methods would allow future projects to expand on what we create, including the potential for a comparative map that tracks multiple novels across historical and transnational routes.

#Deliverable
A global map composed of three (ideally interoperable) layers: a distorted map of Dublin and its history, a map of the network of correspondance aurrounding the novel’s composition (focused in Western Europe), and a global map which tracks the adaptations of Joyce’s novel in space and time.

#Risks and Constraints
The largest risk is that the three segments of our group’s map will not be interoperable. Strategically choosing a shared platform and developing a shared workflow may help. The platform we choose will also limit the scope of our map (Google Earth will not allow us to produce dynamic maps, but Flash—converted to HTML5—will not be interopreable or easy to replicate). Additional risks surround interoperability and interface. If we design the project to be interoperable, reusable, and replicable, there is a real chance that no one will take advantage of this. The other risk is that our visual arguments which distort geography based on temporality and use anachronistic representation to unseat the novel from its immediate context will be too chaotic or otherwise inelegant.

#Benefits
Our maps could ideally be modified repurposed, and expanded by others. Additionally, our datasets (including Joyce’s correspondance and the novel’s afterlives) will likely be incomplete, leaving room for future contribution. Our workflow could also be replicated to produce other maps for the exhibit space (those currently being proposed in 560). If we use a platform like Google Earth, other projects could replicate our workflow to produce similar maps/layers that could be connected to our own. This would open a space for scholars to collaboratively map transnational networks (and then deconstruct the stable temporal and historical contexts in which those networks are immediately located).

#Timeline
Feb. 11: Collect list of items for exhibit, have scanned images of 19th century map and data from text analysis of the novel for time/space representation
Mar. 4: Have working prototype for small section of map
Mar. 25: Have test version of Dublin map
April 11: Integrate three segments (Dublin, Network of correspondance, adaptations) into a navigable world map (either through shared platform, or by creating a clickable composite image with hyperlinks)
April 16: Polish and deliver final product (navigable overview of world map and its three  individual segments)

#Support
At this stage, our project most needs direction in terms of platform (ideally, a shared platform) including: how to ensure interoperability, methods for producing dynamic maps, and technical details explaining how our map(s) will be integrated into the website for the exhibit.

We will also need a list of suggested readings that help us link our technical and design decisions (surrounding maps and networks) to theoretical arguments about media archaeology and transnational exchange.

#Project Goals
The goal of this project is to produce a working, interactive map of Dublin that uses visual distortion and layered maps to move material from *Ulysses* beyond its immediate context in the novel (this argument must be articulated clearly in or map design). Goals for the map are:
*that visitors see and interact with it and that our interface
*the design clearly articulates our proposed theoretical intervention.

*A further goal could include others expanding or replicating portions of our map.

#Professional Development Goals
One of my ongoing goals is to develop content using a workflow that accounts for both production and theoretical intervention (or, meaninigful connections between the technical and the theoretical). Successfully prototyping and delivering a product that uses interface to levarage arguments about media archaeology, network archaeology, the temporal experience of geography, and the historical and political contexts for transnational literature would fulfill this goal.

I also seek to gain useful experience working to collaboratively co-author digital content and solving the technical and workflow-based problems surrounding that process, including: successful prototyping, integrating content from team members to produce a polished product, and designing a methodology for research and implementation that moves away from traditional, solitary models for academic production.