##Networked *Ulysses*


Networked *Ulysses* is based on the assumption that, just like it takes a village to raise a child, it takes a network of agents/actants to write a novel. Hence this project will explore Joyce's connection to his contemporary social world. The installation treats *Ulysses* as a networked novel and reads it through the metaphors of network culture and social media. Hence Networked *Ulysses* aims to arrive at a visualization that de-centres the authorial figure and highlights the role of Joyce's resources and collaborators. The goal is to let visitors grasp visually and explore some of the connections of the *Ulysses* network in order to gain an understanding of the relational character of novelistic production. This will enable readings of the division of labour in the literary field in general, and with respect to *Ulysses* in particular, that differ markedly from descriptions of the novel as the work of a single creative genius.

It will be essential for the project to gather the identities and historical physical addresses of agents/actants in order to map them. This primary stage of research will make use of the various biographical writings on Joyce as well as published collections of his letters. This includes, but is not limited to, Richard Ellmann's famous biography on Joyce, Peter Hartshorn's *James Joyce and Trieste*, and Corinna del Greco Lobner's *James Joyce's Italian Connection*. Some of Joyce's letters are collected in *Letters I-III*, edited by Stuart Gilbert, and *Selected Letters of James Joyce*, edited by Richard Ellmann. William S. Brockman's essay “Letters” will help in sifting through the many volumes of Joyce's correspondence. Based on its user-friendly characteristics and intuitive appeal to a large group of viewers who are probably familiar with it, [Google Maps](http://maps.google.com) seems to be best choice for mapping (parts of) the *Ulysses* network. The application's functions are well suited for the presentation of this kind of network and might allow for the installation's afterlife as a crowd-sourcing project that gradually extends the number of connections through contributions by other researchers. A model for how such a project might continue is [Mapping John Glassco's Memoirs of Montparnasse](http://aelang.net/projects/glassco.htm). This project ensures interoperability by making the underlying Google spreadsheet used to populate its map publically available.        

What the project cannot achieve is a representation of the entire *Ulysses* network with all its agents/actants. In fact, the initial title The *Ulysses* Network was rejected because of its misleading insinuation that the presentation of the network could in some way be conclusive. In order to limit a possibly limitless gaze, then, the exhibit will indicate the extension of the Long Now in which Joyce's work took shape by choosing a small number of physical addresses for each European city involved.

The project aims at the generation of a website that is part of the exhibit The Long Now of *Ulysses*, but independent of technical constraints in the exhibit space. It shares its web presence with two other geospatial projects: one mapping *Ulysses*'s afterlife, the other displaying historical maps of Dublin. A user will be able to navigate to the different projects via a central page. Networked *Ulysses* will feature three (or five, respectively) layers in [Google Maps](http://maps.google.com), with each layer corresponding to one of the three places of composition indicated by Joyce's final entry in the novel: “Trieste – Zurich – Paris. 1914-1922.” So there will be a Trieste network, a Zürich network, and a Paris network, each taking up Joyce's presence in the respective city and mapping his contacts across Europe at the time. Since Joyce continued to be in contact with a few constant contributors in Dublin, the map will feature Dublin as a fourth layer. In line with the impetus of suppressing the author function in order to highlight his contributors, a fifth layer—the author node—will present the numerous places where Joyce lived in the cities mentioned above; but, just as the other layers, this node can be turned on and off deliberately, blocking or including the author in the network that led to his novel.  

The initial idea for this project was to articulate the voices of agents/actants by letting the correspondence, in particular the responses by Joyce's correspondents, speak for itself. The feasibility of this approach, however, is questionable. The volumes of collected letters focus on Joyce, the author, and generally do not include the responses. More comprehensive research might be able to unearth some of the responses; but such research cannot be done in three months and will probably require extensive travelling in order to capture materials that are housed in different collections and archives. Another related potential risk is the project's scope, in particular with respect to the question of what agents/actants (human or non-human) should be counted as part of the networks. By confining the group of actants to humans (i.e. "direct" contributors, from whom Joyce solicited information, and "indirect" contributors, whom Joyce encountered in his life and decided later to take as models for certain characters) this risk has been somewhat contained for now.
      
This difficulty of unearthing original responses indicates how Networked *Ulysses* goes against the grain of Joyce/*Ulysses* scholarship, which, by and large, has been more interested in the author than in his respondents. The field could therefore benefit from such a reversal of the angle, as it refuses to treat the novel as a monolith and provides an archeology of its production instead. More generally, this deconstructive approach has consequences for an understanding of the function of the author, in particular in the case of encyclopedic novels such as *Ulysses*. 

#Timeline
* April 16th: Deliver a tested, working site/integrate the map into a website for purposes of presentation 
* March 25th: Finish a "mask" for the working map
* March 12: Finish all five networks/first test of map
*March 4th: Finish data for three networks
 
In order to integrate the working map into a website, somewhat like [Mapping John Glassco's Memoirs of Montparnasse](http://aelang.net/projects/glassco.htm), it would be helpful to have a basic understanding of how to make Google Maps a part of other websites, and of gaining an understanding of how to make the map and the website "communicate" with one another (e.g. by integrating the option of "filtering" layers into the site's design).

Using [Google Maps](http://maps.google.com) to map the connections between agents/actants in the *Ulysses* networks ("direct" and "indirect" contributors, etc.) across Europe, the installation will present an interactive display (granting visitors a degree of agency in manipulating the map) in the form of a website. Each correspondent will have an entry in [Google Maps](http://maps.google.com) as a place, linking it to an original physical address and providing a description of the agent/actant as well as an image (where applicable indicating the correspondent's contribution, ideally in the form of a scanned image and/or transcribed text).    

In terms of teaching, which will form a large part of my future career as an instructor in post-secondary education, I hope to learn some fundamental skills in geotemporal mapping. Articulating a text's topography is *the* analytical activity par excellence. Mapping, then, becomes a fundamental analytical tool and a great skill in the preparation of pedagogical material, e.g. to illustrate the structural principles of a text in time and space, deconstruct the network behind the author-function, map the geospatial characteristics of a novel, etc.    
