#Iteration 2: Joyce Bots and Storyboards

Regarding the usability of HyperLit, things have been going pretty well. For some time, now, we have had some pretty solid wireframes that give a good idea of how HyperLit itself would function as an app. However, the critical framework is a key part of this project, and without it we face simply creating/prototyping another gamified reading or generally digital app. For the past few weeks, then, we have been struggling with how to incorporate the critiques of hyper/deep attention, digital economies, and gamificaition that initially informed this entire project. 

A couple of weeks back I proposed that we incorporate an actual economy into the game itself where users could essentially purchase cultural capital or, to phrase it another way, badges/achievements. While I think this idea was on the right track, we decided against it due to its similarity to work undertaken by Ian Bogost in his game Simony and CowClicker (see that log here: [https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/Logs/JohnsonLogMarch14.md]). 

Eventually, the idea emerged of incorporating a kind of "Joyce Bot" that would interact with the user within the app itself while reading or browsing through HyperLit. Funnily enough, this is an idea that we briefly entertained way back in late January, but scrapped almost immediately. It was exciting, then, to see this idea re-emerge. Essentially, the bot will comment (rather snarkily) on the user's activity, and will randomly (as "randomly" as anything can be in a digital environment) appear to make a comment on the user's actions at any given moment, and will make certain comments that would coorespond to the user's current reading point in _Ulysses_. What's more, a Joyce bot would--ideally--be able to make comments that could indicate whether or not a user is re-reading _Ulysses_ (a kind of replay value?), or if a user is behind on their readings. I spent last night and this morning incorporating the Joyce bot into our wireframes (which took surprisingly long). You can find the updated wireframes here: [https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/IterationTwo/HyperLitWireframesBot.md]. The bot is intentionally intrusive--an essential quality, we think, in delivering the satiric/critical level of HyperLit. I have created a kind of "making of" the bot log that can be found here: [] 

In addition to the Joyce bot, we have been working on the next essential component of our project: the speculative design video. After some brainstorming, Nina drew up a fantastic storyboard for our video that can be found here: [https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/IterationTwo/HyperLitStoryboard.md]. The final component of our project really hinges on this video, which we start shooting tomorrow (March 27th). We talked with Stephen Ross a bit yesterday, who provided some really great ideas on how to bring out the satire in the video and how to give our Joyce bot (who will be still-animated into the video) the required "Joycean flair." The shooting should go pretty smoothly, and the rest of the weekend will be spent editing the video in Final Cut Pro. Animating the Joyce bot could be difficult, but we have some assistance lined up to help make it happen. 

And what else? Incorporating our project into the exhibit itself might be tricky, but after looking at the space today we came up with some good ideas. It sounds a variety of looped videos will be a thing, so we should be able to have our video playing periodically on one of the screens. Great! In addition to this, we were looking at the glass panels in the center display, and discussed making a kind of collage of printed out wireframes. To bring our friend the Joyce bot into it, we will print out several little Joyce figures that will "walk" the viewer through the wireframes. I think if we make the figures identical to the ones in the video (complete with text bubble), we'll be able to really make a powerful connection between the two pieces in the exhibit that will stick with visitors.
