# christieWorkflow
## Jan. 15, 2012

Looking explicitly at my daily workflow, and beginning (to borrow from Turkel) to refractor that workflow, has revealed to what extent my current research methods are reactionary. Many of my current practices stem from reactions to external tasks, rather than being self-initiated practices that construct my daily workflow along the path of least resistance (or simply make it more efficient). I currently use *four* web browsers as part of my attempt to sandbox different online tasks: * Safari for sensitive tasks (online banking, etc.) *Firefox for leisure reading/surfing (Ars Technica, Youtube)+Chrome for research (Google Docs, JSTOR, etc.) *and I've been experimenting with Opera as an alternative to Safari for sensitive tasks. My backup strategy is equally 'fragmented'--I have a second installation of OS X on my second internal hard drive, which I move backup copies to (manually using Finder) sporadically; I also upload "duplicate" (I can't help invoking McGann by suspending that term in quotation marks) copies of important text-based documents to iCloud. My backup strategy could be described as ad-hoc. I don't clip web content, but I do use Apple's Reminders app to keep ever-growing lists of content, including a "Reading List," "Viewing List" and "Listening List." I also parse work-related tasks between lists for the weekday and the weekend, which I've found to be effective.

My workflow for composing documents is perhaps the most reactionary. I tried using Scrivener for composing my seminar papers last semester, which I quickly abandoned when I realized that I always work backwards from the length requirement for the seminar paper I'm drafting. While composing seminar papers, I use the page breaks/page numbers to track where I am in the larger paper. Once I have a full first draft, I version it through "Alpha," "Beta," and "Release Candidate" files as I correct typographical and stylistic errors. I do plan to switch to Scrivener once I finish coursework. I've tried to move away from MS Word, which has worked to a degree. Right now I draft my papers in Pages and format them in Libre Office; Libre Office has unfortunately not proven robust enough to be a full alternative to MS Word yet. I will also have to use Word to grade my students' papers electronically for compatibility reasons. In other words, I currently use Pages, Libre Office, Microsoft Word, and TextEdit for different (often interlocking) tasks.

Taken as a whole, I have a workflow that could be described as "eclectic." Rather than automating tasks, or moving content between linked platforms, I tend to treat programs (and even files) as containers that I move content between manually. I shuffle content between platforms, rather than deliberately constructing my workflow such that that process is automated. Automating tasks and storing data so that it's interoperable across the platforms I use is a key goal I hope to chip away at over the coming semester. Implementing some of the practices Turkel describes will allow me to build research content and methodologies that will significantly boost my efficiency as I study for comprehensive exams and synthesize content for my dissertation. I've been experimenting with Evernote and I may automate my local backups; I also plan to scan and OCR analog documents using Acrobat Pro (a practice which I used last year, but have failed to keep up with). Searching with Crawlers and finally making the jump to RSS are two other initial changes I plan to make. I see refractoring my workflow as a long-term strategy for doctoral research. I also have specific genres of music that I listen to for specific types of work, which I've found very effective. [Harold Budd](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harold_Budd) and [Brian Eno](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brian_Eno) are always on queue when I'm writing or reading. That part of my workflow I definitely intend to keep.
