# Arthur Hain - Workflow/ Response to William Turkel's ["A Workflow for Digital Research Using Off-the-Shelf Tools"] (http://williamjturkel.net/how-to/ "A Workflow for Digital Research Using Off-the-Shelf Tools")  

## Going Digital
I’ve always used Firefox simply for layout/design reasons, and have begun to experiment with some of Turkel’s recommended customizations, like search engine extensions. WorldCat, Merriam-Webster, and the various wiki-options (QuickWiki and WikiLook) have been particularly useful so far. While I have readily adapted to simple search extensions, I still find advanced search options intimidating, perhaps partially (and admittedly, irrationally) because they seem to eliminate the serendipitous aspect of stumbling upon something. I also find the layout and amount of options overwhelming, and find myself having to specify searches according to categories that I just never think about. Of Turkel’s recommended digital repositories, I’m most drawn to Europeana, which I’ve bookmarked. I also loved the Digital Research Tools wiki. At this early stage in my digital research development, facility is key for me. DRT is wonderfully intuitive, cataloguing information by type of task, clearly stressing practicality and usability (i.e. prompting with “What do you want to *do*?”). I’m also trying out RSS feeds on Sage, which I’ve avoided in the past because I find un-searched-for informational updates overwhelming at times. I think I’ve become entrenched in more traditional modes of information searching because of this vague sense that the act of typing keywords into a search engine performs an act of agency; feeds, on the other hand, make me feel ill-at-ease, like my role as initiator has somehow been supplanted. This is obviously irrational, and if nothing else it’s been a good step to recognize this: thinking about the underlying reasons behind these kinds of hesitancies can help towards overcoming them.  

## Backup Strategies
Backing up is entirely new to me, I think mostly because what I’ve worked on in the past has seemed somewhat temporary: intended specifically for submission in a particular seminar. I rarely revisit this kind of work, so if a file has survived long enough for me to print it and hand it in, I’ve been content. With greater investment, however,—such as with a master’s essay, or the Long Now exhibit—I can see how crucial backing up can be. I’ve used external drives before, but I’m very much intrigued by something like GitHub where you can access different iterations of a document, and see how your work develops from week to week. I’ve also downloaded DropBox, which I’m excited about using, since it allows you to access files from different workstations. Lastly,—and this might not be totally related—I’ve begun to use Google Drive for certain types of documents, which I’ve found to be useful for sharing, commenting, and collaborating.   

## Local Copies
At least with journal articles, I think the easiest thing to do is to just save a .pdf file, and to delegate folders for particular projects; other types of sources I’ve traditionally saved as web archives, but I’m starting to take more screen-shots, especially if what I want to keep is a particular image, paragraph, *etc.*, rather than an entire website or article. I quite like Turkel’s scan/OCR recommendation, since I’ve always struggled to consolidate print sources with electronic sources (I often find I have a pile of books with page markers, and a folder full of highlighted .pdfs, and when it comes to relocating something I’ve read, I don’t know where to start looking). Lastly, though it doesn’t help with actually saving copies, something like RefWorks (or Zotero) is useful for keeping a record of what you’ve read and where to find it again.   
## Applications for Writing
I’ve always used Word, strictly for comfort reasons, but I really like Turkel’s idea that a paper (or book) is made up of smaller components of text, and that you should use an application that more adequately reflects the compository nature of scholarly research and writing: “Inappropriate tools force you to manipulate objects at the wrong scale... Better tools... allow you to focus on exactly the pieces you need for the task at hand.” I think this way of looking at a document is helpful, not only in overcoming sometimes-daunting page count requirements, but because it enables you to focus more on smaller portions of text (say, a paragraph), and better visualize the arrangement of a document as a whole (instead of trying to write in order, as Word’s layout encourages). I’m fairly won over by the testimonials of Turkel, Johnson, and Black on Scrivener, and have downloaded a 30-day trial version, which I’d like to start using for paper drafts. I do, however, foresee myself returning to Word for final versions, syncing, and editing, again for comfort reasons.    
## General Reflection
Unsurprisingly, I think what a lot of this suggests is that I’m fairly reluctant to large scale change in terms of research methods, tools, and applications. I think it takes me longer than most people to adjust to new technologies, and that there are some aspects of reading and writing processes that I will probably always carry out manually. For example, I don’t think I’ll ever be able to read a book-length resource electronically. I’m fond of Turkel’s term *kaizen* here: I think the integration of new technologies and knowledge platforms into my research process will always be a gradual, and ongoing process of fine-tuning.    
