# Workflow

## Amanda Hansen

For this discussion of workflow, I think it is imperative that I distinguish between that which is my reality, and that which is my ideal. The circumstances of my digital infrastructure -- namely, my five-year-old Macbook -- limit my access to several applications which I will most assuredly  incorporate into my workflow as soon as I am able to do so. Thus, in the process of reflecting on my present workflow, I will also note the applications which I hope will soon become part of my workflow as well.   

Currently, I use Safari as my web browser for a couple of reasons. First, my computer runs on the 10.5.8 OS, which cannot support my ideal browser, Google Chrome. I use Chrome at the Maker Lab, and  I have found it to be an intuitive and intelligent browser. On my personal laptop, I have Firefox installed, but I do not and will not use it for a rather superficial reason: its clunky, PC-like interface. I know most people, including Turkel, recommend Firefox, but it just does not work for me. Even though Turkel is right in stating that "bookmarks are of little value," I am content (for now) to use the Safari bookmarks bar, and to personalize my data via iGoogle.   

Right now, I back up my computer onto an external hard drive using Time Machine on an (admittedly) irregular basis. I took a look at SuperDuper, which Turkel suggests using as well, and while I understand the appeal, I think Time Machine is sufficient for my needs at this time. Given my current digital infrastructure, something like Jungle Disk seems like too much of a commitment. I do intend, however, to use Dropbox for file storage, and to back up my system more regularly using Time Machine. 

My day-to-day local copying and clipping process is somewhat more haphazard in that I use Gmail as my "cloud." My reliance on email started over a decade ago, and email has become such an integral part of my workflow that I have not yet upgraded to Dropbox or another backup system. I email sources, links, screenshots, and documents to myself so that I can access them anywhere. In essence, my email inbox is my filing cabinet. I am, however, starting to use Google Docs and Evernote more regularly, and I hope to wean myself off email-as-cloud soon. I love Turkel's idea of bursting large documents into smaller, more easily searchable chunks, and then storing them in Evernote. I am also quite excited about the potential of GitHub, especially in relation to collaborative work. 

As far as word processors are concerned, I am fairly old fashioned. While I think Google Docs is wonderful for shared work, and LibreOffice is adequate (although inconsistent), when it comes to writing I use Word. Like my preference for Safari, I think my continued use of Word is a result not only of habit and familiarity, but also of my out-dated infrastructure. My laptop's operating system cannot handle the up-to-date versions of most applications -- TextWrangler and Scrivener included -- which means that I would have to use older versions, some of which are no longer supported (TextWrangler, for example, offers 3.5.3 as "a courtesy"). 

In his blog post "Going Digital," Turkel makes the distinction between analogue and digital. Based on my preferences and workflow, I would say that I use an analogue approach in the digital environment. Instead of using a spider or bot to collect information for me, I prefer to do it all myself. I would rather use several single-purpose applications and F3-toggle back and forth than surrender my work over to a program, and I would never follow Turkel's suggestion to "research 24/7." Perhaps this reflects my controlling nature and consequent lack of trust in the digital; while I know that I am creating extra work for myself, I prefer to control all of the things. However, I am interested in updating my preferences, and as soon as I upgrade my system, I will be incorporating more centralized and multi-use applications -- including Chrome, Zotero, and Scrivener -- into my workflow. 




