# Log: Mikka Jacobsen
# 15 January 2013
# William Turkel: “A Workflow for Digital Research Using Off-the-Shelf Tools” 


Admittedly, I am not the most tech-savvy person. Generally, my workflow for researching and working with digital materials looks something like this: I either do a fairly general search using the library databases or Google. Using Preview, I save articles as PDFs on my desktop, and I copy and paste other text-based information into the Stickies app. I do my writing in MS Word, and my ‘system’ for backing up my work is to email a file to myself at regular intervals as I go. This clearly has its drawbacks, as I routinely forget to email files, and most of my work is not backed-up at all. For example: I only have local copies of all of the articles and other research materials I collect. If I were to lose this information, it would takes weeks to recover (and, as my memory would be my only record of much of it, most of this work would be lost).

I hope that applying some of Turkel’s recommendations will improve my research skills and the quality of my work. I use Google Chrome as my browser, although I can’t really articulate a good reason for this choice, other than the fact that other people have recommended it to me. Some of Turkel’s suggestions for useful search engines (‘going digital’), such as WorldCat and GoogleBooks, are familiar to me. I installed Zotero, and although I haven’t yet spent enough time to become fully familiar with this tool, I hope it will be immensely useful. Part of the reason I have resisted digital technology is that I find it frustrating to learn how to use new applications. I need to get over it. I have never used RSS. In fact, had no idea what it was. I installed Feedly, and I am amazed! I seriously love this app. Already, I can see how the Internet can become more navigable and useful if one knows how to use it.

As I mentioned, I am not any good at backing up my files. I do use Dropbox, but rather lackadaisically. Perhaps it is time to invest in an external hard-drive. I also have never really considered my own writing process as versioning. I generally just save over everything as I go. It would be interesting, if not beneficial to my writing, if I saved my drafts. I would like to be able to revisit a first draft, to document how it changes over time. At this point, I am not invested in ‘making everything digital,’ although the IRISPen does look pretty cool. Turkel’s section ‘Research 24/7’ made me shudder, and while the concept and process he recommends seem potentially helpful, I think I’ll leave that one alone for now. I have installed Evernote. Again, still trying to figure out how to use the app most effectively. I learned how to take a screen shot! So, between collecting citations in Zotero and saving PDFs and screenshots in Evernote, I hope to streamline my work. But, for sure, Feedly is my favourite new tool!



