Workflow Reflection Assignment

Admittedly, I still am not entirely sure just what kind of work or research I will be doing this semester in English 507, so creating a workflow at this early of a point is a bit of a challenge. With that said, Turkel’s “A Workflow for Digital Research Using Off-the-Shelf Tools” provides some really excellent looking tools to help conduct my research and supplement my writing. 

I primarily use Firefox for my web browsing. I had never considered “modifying” my browser for research, but have done so having read Turkel’s article. Specifically, I have added (for the time being) the “Deeper Web” add-on (I love the tag cloud approach; very intuitive), Zotero (because it is just makes so much sense for taking snapshots and making “local copies,” and it works across PC and Mac platforms. Plus, it functions so much like iTunes that no real learning curve is required. I have yet play with Evernote, however), and Mendeley (for obvious organizational reasons for means of creating a resource/research database). For digitizing my work/research, I covet the Irispen product, but am not sure if this is within my price-range at the moment. As mentioned, I will probably add more of these tools to my browser as I get further in to my research/work for English 507. 

As for my “backup and versioning strategy,” I will likely use Dropbox to backup/store all of my work. I often work between several computers (my aging Asus netbook, my girlfriend’s Macbook, and the Macs in the lab I work in), so something like Dropbox makes a lot of sense for me. I like that it is free, and that I can sync it between a variety of computers and devices (though I’m unsure if my clunky Android phone will be able to handle it). I am generally pretty good about backing up my work; up until now I have been backing up basic documents (word, image files etc) simply by emailing them to myself. This, of course, lends itself to flooding my inbox with “versions” of projects/documents—a burden that will be done away with with Dropbox. As for versioning, this requires some experimentation. I use the atrocious Microsoft Works on my netbook, which generally requires me to reformat entire papers across computers. It is a dreadful process that I might be able to rid myself of with something like Dropbox. 

As for writing, I have of course been using Microsoft Word (and Microsoft Works when given no choice) for years. However, having been introduced to Scrivener, I will likely begin using this for my writing. Having watched some tutorials and downloaded the Free Trial, I have probably only used about 2% of the program, but what I have used seems to work really well and is quite intuitive. For means of organizing, layering or “bursting” content (if I understand the concept correctly), it looks to work very well, and is far more effective than “command-effing” documents to find key words/sections etc. What’s more, I find the interface adheres to what little (very little) xml/code work I have done in Text Wrangler. Again, I’ve barely scratched the surface of the hardware, so any insight I have into it will be quite elementary. 

Having done this exercise I realize how I really have not been utilizing technology to its full potential in regards to my scholarly work. Despite the fact that I spend half of my life in front of a computer, I have been utilizing very little of what it as a tool can offer.  I am reminded of Tara McPherson’s notion of technological “forms of literacy” (McPherson 120). Having read and considered both Turkel’s and McPherson’s article I am not, I suppose, all that technologically literate! This exercise has, then, forced me to consider new ways of utilizing software in order to research and do work in differing ways. I’m surprised that for so long I have restricted myself to Microsoft Word, Google Search, Bookmarks etc, and how—in a sense—I have been utilizing my computer simply as slightly faster way of writing and finding information. Being new to the majority of the programs/apps/add-ons explored in this exercise, I cannot say for certain how my writing/research process will change in the long-term, but I look forward to seeing how the relation between the technology I utilize and my scholarly interests might shift and change over the coming months. 
