## Log Entry 1: *Workflow*  									        
# Tim Personn

In my use of the Internet as a tool for research, I have discovered that its infinite temptations are a problem. I need to limit its distractions as much as possible so that working does *not* become surfing. Any tool that limits my exposure to irrelevant content is a good idea in this respect. So I welcome [Turkel's suggestions for Firefox plug-ins](http://xxx “Bill Turkel's digital kit”). A major change of my work habits is the use of the Firefox search box for other engines than Google, its default setting. By simply switching its symbol, and thus the selected engine, I can avoid 
* a trip to UVic's library webpage (using WorldCat) or 
* to my collection of classics (using the Project Gutenberg plug-in). 
Similarly, I can now avoid going to an online encyclopedia (using the QuickWiki or WikiLook plug-ins). The interfaces for these plug-ins are integrated with the browser and thus very comfortable. I also got used to the keyboard shortcuts instantly. At the same time, I know to stay away from a plug-in like [StumbleUpon](http://xxx “Tripping”), which would just create even more (interesting but time-consuming) distractions.    
I am torn on the question of automatic file back-up. (I have an external hard drive and often back up essential files, e.g. projects I am currently working on whose loss would be disastrous; I also keep copies of finished work or works-in-progress in a Dropbox folder). I realize that it is more convenient to have an automated process of backing up files. But my concern with the use of Time Machine et al. is this: maybe, after a week of work that led to a dead end, I want to get back to an earlier version of a file; if Time Machine has already updated the version from my hard drive, however, I will have lost the earlier version. That is why I prefer to stay in control when it comes to back-up—but maybe I should pick *one day a week* for doing this manually?    
Even though I am already using Zotero for local file storage in a bibliographic database, Turkel has inspired me to do a better job of digitizing what I read on paper and keeping a pdf. of content I find on the net. Since I intend to do data mining with large collections of book reviews, the Firefox plug-in DownThemAll promises to help with the establishment of a database by allowing me to download the content of a webpage.      
Scrivener reminds me in its interface design of sequencing programs like Logic; given my own positive experiences in those music environments, I also consider giving Scrivener a chance. [Johnson's description of DevonThink](http://xxx “Product Placement”) sounds incredibly helpful, too, since my own writing process seems similar to his: the stage of indiscriminate reading, followed by an organization phase, at the end of which I usually end up with something akin to Johnson's [“archipelago of inspiring quotes.”](http://xxx). Using DevonThink, which I have not yet bought but seriously consider purchasing, I would now be able to follow this “analog” workflow in a digital environment. One question remains: what to do with my (already and soon-to-be handwritten) notes? After all, I find a kind of kinetic and haptic joy in writing in a notebook; I wonder how I could integrate this indispensable part of my creative routine into a *digital* workflow? 
