#Bloom Vision   

An experiential installation introducing stereoscopic vision.  
##Abstract     

Bloom Vision explores the related processes of stereoscopy and photogrammetry, integrating new and old media across physical and digital spaces to provide Long Now exhibit-goers with an experiential introduction to stereoscopy: a popular nineteenth century visual entertainment, which—like the early cinema and other then-emergent technologies and art forms—contributed to new ways of seeing and significantly influenced the aesthetic experiments of modernism.    

##Process and Rationale    

Walking along Sandymount Strand in the ‘Proteus’ episode of *Ulysses*, Stephen Dedalus remarks,      
  >“Flat I see, then think distance, near, far, flat I see, east, back. Ah, see now: Falls back suddenly, frozen in stereoscope. Click does the trick.” (61)  

Reading this, something pops out to me in much the same way as the stereoscopic image Stephen alludes to here: curiously, it is with reference to a specific nineteenth century mechanical device that Stephen articulates his everyday visual experience of three-dimensional space. This is because nineteenth century visual technologies and art forms—like photography, the magic lantern, stereoscope, and zoetrope, leading up to the development of Edison’s Kinetoscope and the early cinema of attractions—were vastly significant in structuring previously unexperienced modes of vision and influencing the everyday phenomenologies of modernity.    

Invented and theorized in 1838 by Charles Wheatstone and refined throughout the nineteenth century, stereoscopy was an important precursor to cinema: just as cinema created the illusion of movement by a rapid succession of still images, the stereoscope created the illusion of depth by offsetting similar two-dimensional images and isolating what the right eye sees from what the left eye sees. According to David Trotter, the stereoscope “received its first major exposure at the Great Exhibition of 1851” (27); not long after it became “a staple of home entertainment” (28). The principles of stereoscopy saw several instantiations throughout the nineteenth century; undoubtedly, however, the most popular was the deliberately unpatented handheld version developed by Oliver Wendell Holmes in 1861. Bloom Vision presents Long Now exhibit-goers with a functional recreation of the Holmes stereoscope in order to:      
	1. Provide a material example of the kind of stereoscope Joyce invokes in Ulysses. Unlike cinema, the stereoscope has not maintained the kind of popularity it enjoyed in the latter half of the nineteenth century. While the principles of stereoscopy have informed recent technological developments in visual culture—photogrammetry and 3-D movies, for example—few people are familiar with stereoscopy in its original form.    
	2. Allow exhibit-goers to actually experience stereoscopic vision: an experience which is not only symbolically significant in the narrative of *Ulysses*, but also crucial to our understanding of the everyday phenomenologies of modernity.     

Jonathan Crary shows that “the ways in which we intently listen to, look at, or concentrate on anything have a deeply historical character” (1). The computer screen, for example, has led to the emergence of a new cognitive style in our own culture, called hyper-attention (see [N. Katherine Hayles](http://media08.wordpress.com/2008/01/17/my-article-on-hyper-and-deep-attention/); or, more locally, the Long Now exhibit contributions of [Nina Belojevic](http://ninabelojevic.wordpress.com/projects/hyperlit/), [Jon Johnson](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/Portfolio/johnsonportfolio.md), and [Mikka Jacobsen](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/Portfolio/jacobsenPortfolio.md)). Particularly with regard to nineteenth century visual entertainment devices, Crary writes, “Ideas about perception and attention were transformed in the late nineteenth century alongside the emergence of new technological forms of spectacle, display, projection, attraction, and recording” (2). I suggest that by studying technologically influenced perceptual shifts historically—particularly in the context of the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, which witnessed revolutionary changes in entertainment and visual media at the hands of mechanical reproduction—we may become better attuned to the ways in which contemporary technologies are currently radically restructuring our own modes of perception and attention. Further, by actively engaging with unfamiliar, archaic technologies like the stereoscope, we may experience a significant approximation of historically particular modes of vision, thereby performing a gesture of empathy that recalls one of *Ulysses*’ ethical imperatives: to see as others—in this case, Stephen, Bloom, and others living in the early twentieth century—see.    

Stereoscopic vision consists of a coexistence of the optical and what has been called the haptic: an almost tactile sense of vision, which “feels its way along or around a world conceived as an infinitely variable surface, alert to texture rather than outline” (Trotter 28). Holmes himself describes the way in which his own device—by isolating different vantage points—creates the illusion of depth:    
>“By means of these two different views of an object the mind… feels around it, and gets a sense of its solidity.” (qtd. In Trotter 30)   
  
Stereoscopic vision offers an illusion of tangibility to visual phenomena; not surprisingly, some of the most popular stereographs were pornographic in content. Another important characteristic of the stereoscope is what Crary calls its “decisive *exclusion* of the periphery”: the particular visual experience it constructed, “in its hypertangibility, was all figure with no ground, no periphery” (258). The result is, not only a loss of “the classical figure/ground relationship, but also of consistent and coherent relations of distance between image and observer” (258). Stylistically, we can see how the principles operating behind the stereoscope may have influenced Joyce apart from his explicit reference to the device in the ‘Proteus’ episode. Ulysses is almost encyclopedic in its inclusiveness; its style significantly departs from classical narrative perspective; its protagonist’s consciousness tends to dwell both on the seemingly trivial—what from other perspectives would make up the periphery—and the tangible. As an advertising clerk and the father of a photography student, Bloom would have been almost certainly familiar with the stereoscopy, but we find no Holmes stereoscope in the ‘Ithaca’ episode’s inventory of household objects inside no. 7 Eccles Street. As Trotter writes, “Bloom does not own a stereoscope. Perhaps he doesn’t need one. He is already a connoisseur and advocate of the haptic-contingent” (43).   

Tara McPherson distinguishes two modes of binocular vision: lenticular and stereoscopic. For McPherson, lenticular vision operates on a principle of segregation: like stereoscopy, it involves two different images, but “it makes seeing the images *together* very difficult.” She writes, “A lenticular logic is a covert racial logic,” which fixates “on sameness or difference while forestalling connection and interrelation.” The stereoscope, on the other hand “melds two different images into an imagined whole, privileging the whole.” Trotter suggests that our own culture has “forgotten what it means to view or to think stereoscopically” (28), meaning haptically, but also in Crary’s sense of not distinguishing between figure and ground, and in McPherson’s sense of “privileging the whole.”     

Bloom Vision invites exhibit-goers to do what *Ulysses* itself demands: to see stereoscopically; to see haptically; to see figure; to see whole; to see as others see.  

I have assembled a physical Holmes stereoscope to be used—along with selected stereographs of Dublin from 1894 (by [Alfred Seamen](http://www.freewebs.com/jb3d/apps/photos/album?albumid=154039)), James Joyce in Paris (from [UVic Special Collections’ Gisèle Freund Fonds](http://library.uvic.ca/spcoll/guides/sc043.html)), and well-known landmarks from *Ulysses* (from Edward Quinn’s [*James Joyce’s Dublin*](http://www.amazon.ca/James-Joyces-Dublin-Edward-Quinn/dp/0436395002))—for exhibit-goers to experience the historically particular and technologically structured mode of vision we call stereoscopic. I have adapted Freund’s and Quinn’s photographs into stereographs myself, by duplicating and disproportionately cropping images and setting them next to each other. Using photogrammetry—derived in part from stereoscopy—, I have also made [3-D digital objects](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/tree/master/English507/Portfolio/HainPortfolio/3D%20Components) of each individual stereoscope component that can be printed with 3-D printers like MakerBots and reassembled. My project thus integrates new and old media and explores stereoscopy across physical and digital spaces.  

For more on how this became that, or the making of Bloom Vision please see my [process video](https://vimeo.com/64191659).  

##Reflection Statement  

Looking back on my [Needs Assessment](https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/LongNowOfUlysses/blob/master/English507/NeedsAssessment/HainNeeds.md) my initial practical and personal goals for this project were  
>“to have both a usable recreated stereoscope for exhibit-goers to experience stereoscopic vision, as well as a digital model so that the project can see further iterations in diverse uses and contexts. My personal goals for this project are to learn more about the role of cinema and photography (and the popular arts more generally) in Ulysses; to research and think about the ways that mechanical reproduction, its arts and technologies, created paradigmatic shifts in the phenomenologies of modernity; to think about how contemporary technologies and media are performing a comparable role in our own society and culture; to gain experience in exhibit-building in the physical sense of the term, but also to get a sense of the possibilities for exhibit-building in our digital age (how can new technologies enhance our experience of an exhibit, or offer new experiences?); finally, to experience making, both manually and digitally, and to better understand the material processes of both.”  
  
While I believe I have satisfied many of these goals—the stereoscope is built, its 3-D modeled components are readily available; through Trotter, Crary and other valuable resources I have learnt much about the roles of nineteenth century visual media both in *Ulysses* and in shaping modern modes of perception more generally—I’m somewhat more reluctant to give myself a passing grade with regard to those of the above that explicitly state “digital” or “contemporary.”  

Have I come to any revelation about the ways in which contemporary media and technologies are performing comparable roles to those nineteenth century visual technologies that Crary has shown to have radically altered modes of vision and perception? Perhaps not yet, or not to the same extent. Maybe this is a question of exposure: my backgrounds in modernism and film studies are considerably stronger than in digital humanities or contemporary cultural criticism. Maybe it’s a question of critical distance: it’s understandably more difficult to think critically about the culture you participate in than about the cultures of modernity. But I think that thinking about these things historically is a good place to start.   

Have I developed many digital competencies? Bloom Vision is perhaps the least digital project a person could submit in a digital humanities course (maybe I’m underestimating myself; surely there are increasing affinities between the fields of media studies and DH). But I think that through this project I’ve improved at video-editing. And I like to think that the 3-D objects I put together in Autodesk turned out pretty well. Actually, I thoroughly enjoyed my introduction to photogrammetry, and believe this may end up being one of the things I take away from my experiences with this project and in English 507. I can see myself pursuing photogrammetry, possibly making architectural models of literary houses, and continuing to explore through this method intersections between old and new media, and physical and digital space. So that aspect was definitely a pleasant surprise.  

More generally, though, I think that through this project and this class, slightly more advanced applications of the digital have positively influenced my everyday work practices. For example, I’m writing this document on Scrivener, rather than Word, and submitting it to an online repository where I can share or version it. I’ve had to, of necessity, host files on dropbox, and collaborate with other students through Google Drive. These things seem slight, but to an embarrassingly slow digital convert, they have significantly altered—and I would definitely say improved—my everyday work practices.  

##Notes for Future Development  

My 3-D models of the stereoscope components were expressly intended for whatever future iterations the Long Now exhibit may see. If we consolidate our class resources into an online exhibit, if some of us happen to present aspects of our exhibit as conferences, if the physical exhibit itself moves to a new space either dispersed around UVic or elsewhere, or if other universities or cultural associations want to use Long Now materials pedagogically or for future exhibits on *Ulysses,* modernism, or digital approaches to literature in general, then the .OBJ files are available and can be rescaled and adjusted, or printed as is to reassemble a functional Holmes stereoscope.    

If given more time, I would like to produce more stereographs for inclusion in the exhibit. On the subject I should also add that I still need to find a way of presenting them in the exhibit space. They should include information telling exhibit-goers what they’re looking at (the view from the Martello tower, the interior of a Dublin Turkish bath), what significance it might have to the novel (in the case of the Freund photographs this might not be necessary; others, like the Turkish bath, which Bloom thinks about visiting in the novel, might require some exposition in the form of a quote from the novel), who took the photo, where, and when. They should perhaps also be mounted. And we should find some way to keep them anchored in the space, while still allowing exhibit-goers to flip through them and view stereoscopically. I am, of course, available, and happy to help with this process.  


##Bibliography  

Baron, Scarlett. "Flaubert, Joyce: Vision, Photography, Cinema." *Modern Fiction Studies* 54.4 (2008): 689-714.    
Burkdall, Thomas L. *Joycean Frames: Film and the Fiction of James Joyce.* London: Routledge, 2001.   
Crary, Jonathan. *Suspensions of Perception*. Cambridge: MIT P, 2001.  
---. *Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nineteenth Century*. Cambridge: MIT P, 1992.  
Elliott, Devon et. al. “New Old Things: Fabrication, Physical Computing, and Experiment in Historical Practice.” *Canadian Journal of Communication* 37.1 (2012): 121-8.   
Joyce, James. *Ulysses.* Ed. Declan Kiberd. New York: Penguin, 1992.  
McPherson, Tara. “Why Are the Digital Humanities So White?, or, Thinking the Histories of Race and Computation.” *Debates in the Digital Humanities*. Ed. Matthew K. Gold. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2012.  
Quinn, Edward. James Joyce's Dublin. London: Secker and Warburg, 1974.   
Spiegel, Alan. *Fiction and the Camera Eye: Visual Consciousness in Film and the Modern Novel*. Charlottesville: U of Virginia P, 1976.    
Trotter, David. *Cinema and Modernism*. Oxford: Blackwell, 2007.    
Wheatstone, Charles. "On Some Remarkable, and Hitherto Unobserved, Phenomena of Binocular Vision." *Philosophical Traditions* 128 (1838): 371-94.  
