# Prospectus for “The Long Now of Ulysses”

Co-curated by Jentery Sayers, Stephen Ross, English 507, and English 560 (Spring 2013)

Author: Stephen Ross 

## Rationale

“The Long Now of Ulysses” takes the modernist fascination with time and space as its cornerstone, using James Joyce’s modernist masterpiece Ulysses as a springboard for presentation of a rich context of historical, cultural, and aesthetic materials in a range of media. It will introduce visitors to the broad contexts of modernism even as it brings to light both the everyday content and the avant-garde stylistic dimensions of the novel. The exhibit takes Ulysses as its starting point for several reasons: we have it and are concluding the first-ever publication of it online, it’s perhaps the sine qua non of high modernist literary production (barring only The Waste Land), and it was at the very center of a dizzyingly productive time and place -- Paris in the 1910s and 1920s -- and formed part of the context for, and was contextualised by, virtually every significant aspect of modernist cultural production. As such, it is not simply an instance of modernism, but perhaps its key metonym: the part that can stand for the whole, directing us out from its centrality to the rich context in which it emerged and which it in turn helped shape. In this respect, and as the ongoing fascination with modernist aesthetics demonstrates (e.g., the popularity of Mad Men, the recent worldwide tour of the Vorticist exhibit), we remain firmly in the long now of Ulysses even today. This exhibit will extend this long now across media, times, and places to suggest ways in which we might still treat Ulysses as a springboard into the cultures of modernity and even postmodernity. With this junction between modernism and the long now in mind, the exhibit will tackle the questions “what does a modernist literature exhibit look like today?” and “how do people today engage with such literature?” In a society that appears to have an ever decreasing attention span, attention seems to be the hottest commodity (as [Beller](http://cabinetmagazine.org/issues/24/beller.php) already noted). In our increasingly digital economy, time has shifted, and our personal time has become the most valuable, hence the increased value of our attention. Now that we place such high value on our time and attention, what type of investment would it be to read a 900-page novel like Ulysses? And how can a current-day audience, used to blog posts, Twitter, and the notion of freedom to respond to, share, and express all opinions and thoughts instantly, engage with Joyce’s masterpiece on a level that is appreciative and critical in a way that eschews mere consumption the “passive reception of amusement” ([Arendt](http://www.jstor.org/stable/20026571)), encouraging active participation, learning, and reflection instead. “The Long Now of Ulysses” aims to offer visitors an interesting and accessible introduction to Ulysses that brings out its continued relevance in the now while also creating an engaging cultural experience outside of the attention economy of our digital era.

## Curation

The exhibit will be co-curated by Drs. Jentery Sayers and Stephen Ross, who will oversee the creative and collaborative contributions of the graduate students in Dr. Sayers' English 507 course (“Introduction to Digital Humanities”) and Dr. Ross’ 560 course . The curation approach will be inspired by the challenge to create a literary exhibit for today that brings together digital and analog, creator and audience, critic and consumer, exhibition and experience, space and time, as well as physical and digital. The 507 students will be responsible for developing presentation and communication methodologies that conceptually respond to this challenge, which will include some use of intelligent environments that incorporate the audience in the exhibit and overcoming technological challenges. The faculty and the 560 studends will be responsible for the content of the exhibit, and will provide content expertise, including selecting the materials to be displayed. 

## Organization

The physical exhibit will be centered in the McPherson library, but the experiential opportunities offered will incorporate the entire UVic campus and beyond. The exhibit in the library is organized into seventeen panels corresponding to the seventeen display cabinet sections arranged around the perimeter of the exhibit space, and in the six display cabinet sections located in the centre of the space. Each of the perimeter panels corresponds with an hour in the novel, whose episodes occur in approximately one-hour increments. The first panel will do double duty, displaying the hour of 8:00 am which is narrated twice in episodes 1 and 4 (first from Stephen Dedalus’s perspective and then from Leopold Bloom’s). The remaining panels will each correspond to a different hour and episode of the novel. 

## Perimeter Panels 

Each of the perimeter panels will be arranged around a large blow-up of twenty-two lines from a page in the novel. The pages have been chosen by applying an algorithm to the 1922 first edition of the novel as follows: given that the novel is set on June 16, 1904 and was published in 1922, we have taken 6, 16, and 22 as significant numbers. Starting with the first page of each episode, we counted six pages in and sixteen lines down from the top of the page to begin the excerpts we’ll blow up, and then excerpted 22 lines of text for the poster. This approach means that each panel is constituted by a given text whose significance is the product of a random process, just as modernist works of art increasingly turned to the everyday random experience of the city and rapid-fire technologies for their subject matter. Just as life itself began to feel as though it was blurring for many of the modernists in the first half of the twentieth century, so their works reflected an increased pace in which what Virginia Woolf called “moments of being” were more and more often accidental -- and accidents came to seem more and more significant of a higher order hidden behind superficial chaos. Our method of selecting the passages to blow up for the exhibit mimics this experience, treating Ulysses itself as an apparently chaotic welter from which order and significance can be extracted even when -- perhaps especially when -- the particular encounter is itself randomized. 

The blown-up text is only a springboard, an anchor, for each panel, though, and the exhibit places a premium upon moving beyond the textual alone in its displays. As the attached layout indicates, each panel will feature contextual materials that call out from the posterized excerpts: 

1. using a quotation from later in the book and/or a later work that evokes it, we will provide historical context for the passage, the novel, and modernism more broadly. Format: text and/or reproduced photographs or images. 
2. we will link the passage to a character in the novel, his or her historical basis, and the broader network of modernist cultural production in which they participated (and which participated in the production of Ulysses by proxy)
3. a visual art work that corresponds or evokes/is evoked by the passage will be hung proximate to the blown-up excerpt from the novel; these works will be selected primarily from the UVAC for their aesthetic correspondence and/or their implication in the network of cultural production that circulated around Joyce and his Ulysses. The Gisèle Freund photographs of Paris in the 1920s and 1930s will be of particular interest here, as will the UVAC's Klimt silkscreen and other materials in that vein (all depending upon availability and permission).  
4. an object or artifact that has been reproduced in 3D; these objects will be selected based upon their appearance in the novel, their contextual importance, and their interest factor as historical objects. We will model the objects from existing digital models/scans or scan objects from museum collections to which we have been given access (including UVAC) for this purpose. The objects will be printed on a MakerBot 3D printer (housed in the Maker Lab at UVic) in a resinous material, meaning that they can be freely handled by visitors to the exhibit without fear of damage or loss (should either occur, we will simply print replacements).  
5. sounds/music that correspond to the contexts will be available for playback. These will include historical recordings of soundscapes from the early twentieth century as well as songs, music, voices, readings, and machines. 
6. other texts that are evoked by/evoke the blown-up passage will themselves be presented in smaller blow-up excerpts and, where possible, in the original or rare editions held by Special Collections (in the locked display cases). At a minimum these will include rare editions of Ulysses, but also works by Wyndham Lewis, T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, John Betjeman, Herbert Read, Amelia Laracuen, letters, diaries, advertisements, newspaper pages (we have the 1904 Freeman, e.g.), etc.  

## Center Cabinets

The six cabinets located in the center of the space are organized according to the principle of “unanticipated afterlives.” They will feature works in which artists and critics have taken up Ulysses and its contexts in ways Joyce could not have anticipated: digital manifestations, cinematic renderings, live performances, architectural designs, artistic appropriations, inventive maps, music, etc. They may also encourage the continuation of the “afterlife” by encouraging audience participation, thus perpetuating the life of the text and eliciting new views and interpretations.

## External Engagement

Playing on the concept of the long now, the exhibit will engage the audience beyond the walls of the library by tying the content and meaning of Ulysses to the current life of each of us. Joyce’s work brings out the details of time and space at the most mundane level of everyday activity, taking the reader through the details of Leopold Bloom’s day at an hourly level. The audience will be on campus experiencing their own ordinary days filled with routine activities. While Joyce created a 900-page master piece based on this, we will develop a game that gives players points for even the most basic activity and thus visualizes the everyday. Through an integration with Google Calendars, a number of generic activity categories will become available to the player (eating, reading, watching YouTube, sleeping, studying, socializing on Facebook, presenting, drinking, etc.). Each activity will be worth a certain number of points, and attending the exhibit will lead to bonus points. When players schedule their usual activities into the calendar, they can then visualize their day, which will display in the form of web-comic-like storyboards showing their selected Ulysses character engaging in each of that day’s activities (an alternative would be to present unique avatars based on players’ photos). While the web-comic visualization is a fun way to represent a person’s day and allows that person to share their visuals with friends via social media networks (using Facebook share links etc.), the intention is also to provide an output that visualizes what daily lives in today’s digital culture look like, encouraging players to question and reflect on the current social and cultural state. As the person enters more activities and participates for more days, they gain more points. Once a certain level of points is reached, an access code is provided that gives the player access to a locked vault in the library exhibit that contains a special item that only players get to view.

Further extensions of this game could consist of geo, audio, and physical interaction opportunities. A geocaching-like game component could reward additional points to players who find specific locations and interact with artifacts. Using mobile GPS functions, the players’ journey can be tracked, leading them to specific location that contain mundane, random objects from Ulysses that the players then comment on in an online forum. GPS tracking would also allow for visualization of players’ activities, showing the journey of the player and even the narrative of their day on a location-based level. The journey of this game would ideally align with aspects of Ulysses (e.g. going to a library, a church, etc.) and could even bring out the layered parallels to the Odyssey. Through this gaming quest the players are engaged at a personal level while also gaining a deeper understanding of the significance and meaning of Ulysses and viewing the currently accepted “now” in a more critical fashion.

The key to the game will be to make it accessible for players and easy to engage with. A Google Calendars API that connects to a mobile-optimized site would be ideal, but the feasibility of the data flow between Google and an external site needs to still be explored further. The goal will be to find a solution that can leverage existing platforms and tools while still developing the user experience and interaction intended by the game.
