# Seminar Notes: 8 January 2013 

## Review of Liu and Kirschenbaum 

Liu, [“The State of the Digital Humanities: A Report and a Critique”] (http://ahh.sagepub.com/content/11/1-2/8.abstract) 

Kirschenbaum, [“What is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English Departments?”] (http://mkirschenbaum.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/kirschenbaum_ade150.pdf) 

Questions: 

* What is infrastructure? And why is it so central to digital humanities practice? 

* How are matters of scale central to digital humanities inquiries and projects? For instance, in what ways are projects interoperable, and how does interoperability facilitate collaboration? Also, how does "distant reading" relate to "close reading"? 

* How does method differ from methodology from theory? Why is method a focus of digital humanities? How do methods transfer from place to place, from project to project?

## Review of the Physical Exhibit Space 

We walked over to the library and reviewed the physical space: [the Maltwood](http://uvac.uvic.ca/)

Questions: 

* In practice, how will we collaborate with the other seminar as well as the librarians? 

* What content will be mounted in the physical space? What kind of content? How will the exhibit be distributed (across online/offline space)? 

* How will _Ulysses_ be represented in the space? 

* In collaborative efforts such as this one, how is "expertise" understood, articulated, and practice? How to avoid representing or perceiving digital humanities as a "service" for "scholars with the ideas"? 

## Some Definitions of Digital Humanities / Digital Literary Studies as well as Some Criticisms / Concerns 

Kirschenbaum: "a term possessed of enough currency and escape velocity to penetrate layers of administrative strata to get funds allocated, initiatives under way, and plans set in motion"; also, "a populist term, self-identified and self-perpetuating through the algorithmic structure of contemporary social media"

Bogost: "the humanities of the present moment" 

Sayers: "synthesis of technical competencies in computing with critical thinking in fields such as history, literary criticism, cultural studies . . . "

Digital Literary Studies: 

* (1) the legacies of electronic literature (where DLS implies studying literature that is “digital-born”)
* (2) computational approaches to literary criticism (where DLS implies using digital technologies to interpret literature and/or compose scholarly communications), and 
* (3) critical frameworks for computational culture (where DLS implies examining the recursive relationships between digital technologies and cultural assumptions, practices, and formations).

Elsewhere: 
* Liu: field lacks attention to cultural criticism 
* McPherson: little discussion of topics such as race, neoliberalism, immigration
* [#transformdh](http://transformdh.tumblr.com/)
* Drucker: how to approach data as capta (made/constructed/taken, not given) - see [DHQ](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html)
* HASTAC: difference is our operating system
* How to use digital humanities to "open the archive" or critique canonization / existing canon formations? 
* Intersections of digital humanities with [computational culture studies?](http://computationalculture.net/) 
* What's after instrumentality? That is, if we accept that technologies are value-laden, then how do build accordingly? 
* How can making things become a form of affirmative critique, which does not rely solely on pointing to absence / gaps? 
* How does literature influence our perceptions and uses of technology? What is the agency of literature in a "digital age"? 

## This Semester's Version of English 507 

* collaborative project 
* a project with stakes 
* a project with a deadline 
* a project with flexibility
* a project that corresponds with actual practice in the field  

## The Long Now of Ulysses 

* collaborate with another seminar and other faculty, as well as librarians and other scholars 
* model and mobilize content produced largely by others
* build for an actual audience (Congress 2013, ~7000 people) 
* develop existing interests, with documentation
