# Seminar Notes: 29 January 2013 

## Group Reports 

We first conducted brief, two-minute reports on what each group is doing. Below are some notes.

## AmH, AC, KT, TP 

group met yesterday; branched off into three different "Mapping *Ulysses*" projects; TP: three networks corresponding with the three places where Joyce lived (using Google Maps); AC: creating layers of historical maps of Dublin; also playing with the idea of distorting geographic locations based on what happens in the novel (anachronistic?); need interoperability between three layers; what platform?; AmH: Flash animation of different instantiations of *Ulysses* over time; KT: also, an index for all three projects

## ZV, MR, ArH: ZR 

tinkering with various programs that afford curation of audio; how has audio be repurposed across appearances in film, etc.; copyright is an ongoing issue; MR: thinking through interaction in the physical space (active and passive interactions); combine tactile interaction with audio in the space; need sound for background, too; ArH: researching history of stereoscope; found one from 1861 (never patented); also found specifications and plans; how to avoid taking on too much, tho; found replica kits online; build it or buy a kit?
 
## MJ, DC, LD, AlH

DC: solidified what he's doing; has an idea of how to deliver the markup using a "hub" or index of the excerpts; representing them with a font corresponding with actual text (which font? how to find it?); will markup for aesthetics and structure more than anything else; MJ: researching print+ books/projects; what techniques to use to produce a print+ chapter of *Ulysses*?; LD: for the timeline, sticking largely to the web (not in physical space of exhibit); but will use contributions as rotating content for the exhibit; AlH: researching local launch at UVic; could piggyback on existing project; we could digitize the entire repo of the exhibit and send it into space; need to convince engineers that lit should be in space 

## NB, TD, JJ: NB 

JJ and NB are working together; considered scope during the last week; redefined the project; instead of two gaming projects, a gamified app encouraging users / players to dedicate "deep attention" time to reading novels like *Ulysses*; going to stick to a prototype for now; a speculative design model expressed through video prototyping; JJ: also an outreach element; make difficult lit more accessible through new forms; TD: going to develop documentation for the exhibit and the exhibit process; perusing GitHub repo and turning it into a "how-to" guide for educators and librarians; also developing a narrative of the projects; will be a large doc for public reference 

## Good Practice According to the NINCH Guide 

If and when you have a moment, I recommend perusing the [NINCH Guide to Good Practice](http://www.nyu.edu/its/pubs/pdfs/NINCH_Guide_to_Good_Practice.pdf).

According to the Guide, practice will: 
* Optimize interoperability of materials. (Digitization projects should enable the optimal interoperability between source materials from different repositories or digitization projects.)
* Enable broadest use. (Projects should enable multiple and diverse uses of material by multiple 
and diverse audiences.)
* Address the need for the preservation of original materials. (Projects should incorporate procedures to address the preservation of original materials.)
* Indicate strategy for life-cycle management of digital resources. (Projects should plan for the life-cycle management of digital resources, including the initial assessment of resources, selection of materials and digital rights management; the technical questions of digitizing all formats; and the long-term issues of sustainability, user assessment, digital asset management and preservation.)
* Investigate and declare intellectual property rights and ownership. (Ownership and rights issues need to be investigated before digitization commences and findings should be reported to users.)
* Articulate intent and declare methodology. (All relevant methods, perspectives and assumptions used by project staff should be clarified and made explicit.)

The Guide also prompts practitioners to ask questions such as: 

* Where is the audience for my collections?
* What types of individuals does that audience include?
* Will digitization enable me to meet the needs of existing communities better?
* Will digitization enable me to create new audiences for both the digital surrogates and the analog
sources?
* What do I mean by “audience” in the digital world? Am I referring only to those individuals to whom I can
deliver digital materials or am I also giving consideration to those who would like to produce digital surrogates for business, personal and research purposes?
* What are the aims of the digitization project or program and how can these guide selection, in cases where limited resources prevent you from digitizing the whole collection?
* How do these issues apply to material created in digital form?
* Who will be using these resources?
* What are their needs?
* Do the collections you selected for digitization need special handling?
* What are their characteristics and how do these affect the digitization process?

## Revising the NINCH Guide for Our Purposes

Since our literary exhibit is only in part a digitization effort, I propose revising the above questions to ask the following questions of the exhibit's various components (some responses, which were generated during seminar discussion, are below): 

* Who is the audience for our exhibit? 

Modernists (Irish); UVic Undergrads; UVic Graduate Students; Congress 2013; DHSI; Friends of the Library (Alums); Community Members invested in UVic; Year of Ulysses; Sound and Media Studies Scholars; *Ulysses* Scholars; Author Pages on FB; EMiC; ISE; Students (broadly understood); Bloomsday Site and Groups; CSDH; GitHub; *JJQ*; MJP; GLAM Pros; the Joyce Pub

* Who does that audience include? Who does it exclude (or risk excluding)? 

the gallery scene in Vic (hold special sessions? in-gallery critiques?); CBC; CFUV; fine arts; people unfamiliar with campus; Legacy Gallery (how to communicate with practitioners there?); outreach through *Previews* mag; more "old-school" lovers of Joyce/*Ulysses* who are not interested in tech or digital culture; people who have not read *Ulysses* (language and outreach matter here; a subtitle should better describe what the exhibit is doing)

* Will remediation (or, if you prefer, intermediation) allow us to better meet the needs and interests of specific communities? If so, then who are those communities? 

people who haven't read the novel (spark interest in it); researchers in engineering and other "hard sciences" (we are producing physical content anchored in abstract ideas); new learners/readers of lit (making lit convenient and accessible); textual studies scholars (XML versions of novel); games studies scholars (stressing social forms of reading); fans of maps (geographical and conceptual maps); literary critics (need for more performative / tactile / technique-based work) 

* What do we mean by "audience" in distributed environments, across on- and offline interactions? 

in the physical space: moving through time (there should be a guiding principle); could you walk backwards through the exhibit?; maybe they will just walk up to specific panels (ignoring others); text may not keep people's attention; need to scale text for levels of experience; perhaps a visual aesthetic that affords a cursory interpretation at a glance; perhaps a clock on each panel; in curator's statement, ask audience questions (e.g., relationship between time and space); need to maintain and captivate the audience without relying on spectacle; can you build disinterest into the exhibit?; build time and duration into exhibit experience?

online expectations: most users have tabs open (lots of them); they want comment and share; they want history of where they've been (a history they can also share); expecting very little text (tl;dr); are often willing to try something new, tho (if only for a few seconds / minutes); will likely ask: "what does this engagement asked of me?"; many visitors may be curious about the local exhibit; many of them will not be in Victoria: they could be expecting a digitized rendition of exhibit itself

* What are the aims of our literary exhibit and how can these aims guide its design and modes of communication, interpretation, and persuasion? 
* When asked by community members, how can we best justify what is being included in the exhibit? Even at this early stage of development, what gaps exist in both content and design? 
* In, say, five years, who will be accessing and using materials from the exhibit? 
* What might be the needs and interests of those future audiences? Aside from needs and interests, what else should we anticipate or consider? 
* What are the various material characteristics of the objects we are presenting? How do they affect people's various understandings of digital culture as well as the digital humanities? 
* How should people occupy our exhibit? Or, how do we want them to occupy it, and to what effects on popular perceptions of both literature and curation? 
* And finally, with respect to the long now of things, two more important questions: 

## How Do We Present Histories of Multifarious Futures?   

"If we are to learn from artists who have opted to play the risky game of seeking to sensitize us for the other through and with advanced technology, then gradually we must begin to turn around what is familiar. When the spaces for action become ever smaller for all that is unwieldy or does not entirely fit in, that is unfamiliar and foreign, then we must attempt to confront the possible with its own impossibilities, thus rendering it more inspiring and worth experiencing. We must also seek a reversal with respect to time, which---in an era characterized by high-speed technologies and their permeation of teaching, research, and design---has arguably become the most prized commodity of all. These excursions into the deep time of the media do not make any attempt to expand the present nor do they contain any plea for slowing the pace. The goal is to uncover dynamic moments in the media-archaeological record that abound and revel in heterogeneity and, in this way, to enter into a relationship of tension with various present-day moments, relativize them, and render them more decisive." Siegfried Zielinski, *Deep Time of the Media* (11) 

In many ways, both Zielinski's work and the question above demand an exhibit that avoids kitsch nostalgia ([see Trettien](http://blog.whitneyannetrettien.com/2013/01/circuit-bending-digital-humanities.html), hip retro-futurism, linear narratives, and well-packaged retrospectives. 

And . . . 

## How Do We Highlight the Ways Our Materials Endure and Resist Interpretation? 

"What I am advancing is a media-critical antiquarianism. There has always been a double bind in antiquarian data processing between distance and empathy, resulting from the gap between the physical presence and the discursive absence of the past. Antiquarians have tried to bridge this gap by touching and tasting the immediate, material object. For antiquarians, history is not just text but the materialist emancipation of the object from an exclusive subjection to textual analysis. Antiquarianism acknowledges the past as artifactual hardware, so to speak, upon which historical discourse operates like a form of software. In a digital culture of apparent, virtual, immaterial realities, a reminder of the insistence and resistance of material worlds is indispensable, and all the more so from a media-theoretical point of view." Wolfgang Ernst, *Digital Memory and the Archive* (43) 

These kinds of questions, in tandem with Ernst's work, beg for approaches that do not reduce what's in our exhibit to either a mere documentation of history or a tidy historical narrative. Instead, we might take up the challenge of presenting the exhibit as an active production of historical imagination (e.g., through the arrangement of materials and the juxtaposition of data) open to various configurations. 

## A Quick Lecture: Modelling in Digital Literary Studies 

See slides for details.  

## For Tuesday 

Please read: Besser, [“The Past, Present, and Future of Digital Libraries”](http://nora.lis.uiuc.edu:3030/companion/view?docId=blackwell/9781405103213/9781405103213.xml&chunk.id=ss1-5-6); Brown, Clements, and Grundy, [“Going Electronic”](http://orlando.cambridge.org/public/svDocumentation?formname=t&d_id=GOINGELECTRONIC); Unsworth, [“Scholarly Primitives: What Methods Do Humanities Researchers Have in Common, and How Might our Tools Reflect This?”](http://people.lis.illinois.edu/~unsworth/Kings.5-00/primitives.html); Bowker and Star, from [*Sorting Things Out*](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/sortingThingsOut.pdf); Balsamo, ["Design"](http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/ijlm_a_00036) 
