# Announcements 

Please mark your calendar for Bethany Nowviskie's visit in March (including our seminar meeting with her)

Logs: keep them going; consider vids and images where possible (they will be handy when you are completing your portfolio at the semester's end) 

I'll be providing each of you with an interim report (after reading break). 

# Reports

How are the projects going? (Two minutes per person.)

## AmH

Currently researching who translated *Ulysses* and into what languages (including excluded episodes); should partial translations be included?; what sorts of translations are deemed palatable for stage (or dramatic performances)? for text? 

## AC & KT

Researching possibilities of map overlays; considering three maps in this instance; also, what would be a way to measure temporality and reading time?; using character count to represent reading time. 

## TP

Learned how to use the spreadsheet mapper; toying with various schemas; identified how to produce layered maps; where to put Joyce the author?; could Joyce be a node / layer, which could be removed?; currently documenting process via a log.

## ZV 

Running into copyright issues; the film version, *Bloom*, for instance; how will copyright figure into the trajectories of the project? 

## MR

Survey of excerpts, picking up sounds from them; looking at references (e.g., to *Hamlet*); how to organize the content? how to design a data model that will afford a meaningful / interesting process?; Joyce was an amateur tenor!; what was Joyce listening to? 

## ArH 

Still need to order the kit; will then model it, using photography and stitching (photogrammetry).

## MJ 

How could reading on the web be translated into reading print?; took her own web history and mapped it onto *Ulysses*; cut a word every time she bounces in her web history; how to represent a switch between pages as opposed to domains (sites)? 

## DC 

Transcribed all the text in the excerpts, with line spacing in mind; encountered some issues when translating into a word processor / text editor; got TEI schema ready (in RNG).

## LD

Needs to track down respondents; profs from other universities were interested but did not bite; contact folks on the James Joyce listserv? 

## AlH 

Satellite is being constructed; *Ulysses* could be downloaded from space.

## TD 

Included in her data model sections from the last log (needs assessment); next step: working a structure into the document, which will include a combination of best practices and process documentation.

## JJ and NB

About a dozen mockups done; added them to a log; also, put all info into a spreadsheet; developed a user's perspective.  

# Overview of Today's Lecture 

* Review tensions between medium specificity and media ecology (including a basic understanding of what new media are)
* Case study: *Uncle Buddy*
* An introduction to emulation 

## What Are New Media? 

According to Lev Manovich: 

* composed of digital code (or represented numerically), 
* modular collections of discrete elements, 
* highly automated, 
* variably expressed or versioned, and 
* transcoded (both cultural and computational).  

## Matthew Kirschenbaum on Materiality: 

* formal materiality: propagates the illusion of immaterial behaviour (e.g., the model, the abstraction, the screen, the symbol) 
* forensic materiality: individuation inherent in matter (e.g., inscription, invisible features, technical particulars of software and hardware) 
* allograph: fulfills ontology through reproduction 
* autograph: betrays ontology through reproduction 

(see Matthew Kirschenbaum, *Mechanisms*; Nelson Goodman, *Languages of Art*) 

## Case Study

For *Uncle Buddy*, let's ask: 

* What media or elements are at play in the object (as a modular collection of discrete elements)? 
* How would we describe the formal materiality of these media? 
* How would we describe their forensic materiality? 
* How do we speak meaningfully about the intersections between forensic and formal materialities? 
* How (if at all) do these factors intersect with literary or cultural expression? With production, circulation, storage, and reception?

## Emulation 

* the duplication of one computing system's functions in another
* not a model or a simulation but rather a reproduction of material behaviours.  

Example: [Mini vMac](http://minivmac.sourceforge.net/) 

Issues: 

* Expensive (drains resources)
* Not technologically advanced (for now) 
* May become less popular as writers become more aware of digital preservation strategies 
* Many issues can be resolved through redundancy 
* Historical nature of time and timing (e.g., waiting back then vs. waiting now; lags; load times) 

Techniques: 

* Produce generalizable standards or guidelines for emulators that will run on platforms / systems that have not yet been built 
* Encapsulation: focus on the file / object itself, as well as software, operating system, and metadata 
* Producing structural, administrative, and discovery metadata for digital objects 

## Reading Next Week 

Ramsay, [“Algorithmic Criticism”](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/view?docId=blackwell/9781405148641/9781405148641.xml&chunk.id=ss1-6-7); Manovich, [“Cultural Analytics”](http://www.manovich.net/cultural_analytics.pdf); Samuels and McGann, [“Deformance and Interpretation”](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/new_literary_history/v030/30.1mcgann.html); Moretti, [“Conjectures on World Literature”](http://newleftreview.org/II/1/franco-moretti-conjectures-on-world-literature); and Siemens and Sayers, "Toward Problem-Based Modelling in the Digital Humanities"



