# Seminar Notes: 5 March 2013

# Introductions (1:30-2)

Two minutes each: what you want people to review + your specific questions for them 

TD: 1) feedback in terms of genre (no examples out there); 2) how to manage citations? including material from the repo itself (wants to make the document as friendly as possible); 3) other questions 

-- survey folks in the class about what can be copied, etc? link to external sources (where possible); scope creep! 

JJ & NB: 1) whether the frames communicate the functionality of the app, 2) are the frames and functions comprehensible? 3) does the app still represent the critical framework that interests them/us? does it reflect a critique?

-- this thing is real! and coherent. how about distraction proofing? could you also map the path of critique?  

MJ: 1) how can I maintain linear readings and digital processes (when producing the project)? 2) how might a "link" operate in a print text? 3) DOES THIS MAKE SENSE? 

-- YES, some of the problems that emerge here are built into the inquiry; embrace them? what interesting issues and questions do they raise? 

TP: 1) how to solve the problem that my data does not "fit"? 2) do networks need to cohere? 3) how to mount in exhibit space? 

-- the networks don't need to cohere; idea of exploring on own appeals; ideally, interactive map could be in the exhibit itself; color-coding the project?; the use of three places in a sense makes the network cohere; 

ZV: 1) how to justify what appears in the collection? (use text analysis!) 2) DOES MY MIX TAPE MAKE SENSE? DO YOU LIKE IT? 3) geotagging? 

-- visualization / map sounds great; the project makes sense; plans to create a visualization of some sort for the exhibit;

DC: 1) how to present / preserve white space in xml / css? 2) how to present / publish the excerpts online? 3) what else can I tag? 4) how to give it over to the library? 

-- aesthetic of project is appreciated; make an effort to explain why you are encoding the excerpts; add a narrative / context to the project; emphasize formal changes across the novel; 

AmH: 1) the map or the earth? 2) should I make an animation of the movement? 3) how much info in the bubbles?

-- the map looks cleaner; could the topography of earth be distracting; yes to the animation; preview + "view more" option in bubbles; or earth; sick of Google Maps; design of earth is more appealing; significant statements / blurbs in the bubbles? 

LD: 1) how to modify the design to make a more meaningful viz? 2) how do you deal with the free associators? 3) what might be a material component in the exhibit itself?

-- design is great (x2); free associations make the visualizations more accessible; interesting to see how contemporary readers are consuming the text; how does the text live on?;  

ArH: 1) where in the exhibit space should the stereoscope be? 2) how much of a deal is anachronism? 3) what should the video and related vid processes look like? 

-- object needs to be visible in the space; anachronism could be a strenght (or at least not an issue); vid could be a kind of historical documentation; 3D printing could be curious, too 

KT & AC: 1) changes? would you like to see? what can't you see? 2) how could it be more user-friendly? 3) how do you see yourself interacting with the printed / tactile map? 4) should the finished product be a vid? 

-- vid could be useful as a final product; major question is what the scale of the tactile maps would be; could they be stitched together?; hypercities is an example here; purposefully distort the map to correspond with occurrences in the novel? 

MR: 1) how to experience the exhibit (and the sound)? 2) how visible should processes be? 3) how to navigate selection of sound and relation to history? 

-- not knowing the rules but figuring them out = interesting; headphones both yes and no; grumpy people; time-scaling the sound; short and deep attention issue again; I WOULD LEAVE; difference between museum exhibit and installation 

# Review Round 1 (2-2:25) 

DC-TD
AC/KT-SMacpherson
NB/JJ-ZV
MR-ArH
MJ-TP
AmH-LD

# Review Round 2 (2:25-2:45)

DC-LD
AC/KT-MR
NB/JJ-SMacpherson
ZV-MJ
ArH-TP
TD-AmH

# Reports (2:45-3:30)

Four minutes each (2 minutes per person): responses to the person's questions 

(no notes taken on the reports) 

# Next Steps: Things to Consider during Bethany Nowviskie's Visit 

* professional development strategies (for non-phds) 
* role of for-profits in dh research 
* have someone from the libraries talk to us
* what do librarians need from us 
* how to communicate / collaborate with librarians 
* how to work aesthetically within DH / creative scholarly practices 
* how to balance practical and theoretical 
* libraries as learning commons 
* best spaces for exhibits 
* present a gist of the project through shared interests / chunks (maps, outreach, preservation, )
* general areas of working with librarians, also aesthetics of projects and alt-ac











