# ASSIGNMENTS

Below is a list of the assignments for this seminar, together with a description of what is expected for each. Please note that the requirements are subject to minor changes as the seminar progresses. If I do make a change to any of the assignments, then I will notify you in writing and well in advance

The final project and the final presentation are essential for passing the course. Failure to complete these requirements will result in a failing N grade (calculated as a 0 for your GPA).  

Please also note: I do not post marks outside my office. 

## Log (40%)

Throughout the semester, you will keep a log documenting the iterative development of your learning and your contributions to the literary exhibit. Consisting of several relatively short contributions, your log will be visible to everyone else in the seminar, and you will be expected to comment on contributions published by your peers. I will openly comment on your logs, but marks will never be publicly posted. Your log will be assessed holistically, meaning your work will be given one grade (at the semester’s end) based on its: (1) consistency; (2) development over time; (3) integration of seminar discussions, lectures, and workshops; (4) quality; (5) attention to change; and (6) ultimate relation to your contributions to the literary exhibit. There will be a prompt for each entry in your log, and it will be related to a particular workshop and/or lecture. It will be circulated at least one week prior to its due date. Log entries should be submitted before seminar on the day they are due. If, at any point after our sixth meeting in the term, you would like an interim grade for your log, then feel free to ask. My intention for holistically assessing your log is not to keep you in the dark about your academic progress. It is to treat a log as it should be treated: as a genre that develops and increases in complexity over time. Please note that the tone and style of your logs can be less formal than, say, a seminar essay intended for an academic audience. Where applicable, logs should also be self-aware and reflective in character.  

Though subject to change, the log will consist of at least the following entries: (1) workflow, (2) thought piece, (3) needs assessment, (4) outcomes statement, (5) data model, (6) draft exhibit components (two iterations), and (7) final presentation materials.  

## Final Project (30%)

As per the course description, each of you will contribute to a literary exhibit, which will be mounted (in part) in McPherson Library for Congress 2013. Since the exhibit will involve in situ as well as web-based and distributed components, what exactly you contribute will be largely at your discretion. I encourage you to work in small groups, especially since we will be collaborating as a class to help make the exhibit happen. 

Given the range of possibilities afforded by this approach to digital literary studies, final projects—as more or less “modular” components that can be collectively integrated into the final instantiation of the literary exhibit—will probably vary from student to student, or at least across groups of students. 

With that in mind, each project (regardless of which component you contribute) must involve the following: (1) a portfolio including screengrabs and other documentation of your contributions to the literary exhibit, (2) a 1000- to 1500-word narrative explaining and justifying your contributions, (3) a 500- to 1000-word reflection statement on what practices met your expectations and what surprised you, (4) a 250- to 500-word statement for future development, including what aspects of your contributions (in particular) and the exhibit (in general) you and others could and should develop with more time and resources, and (5) a bibliography. The key aspect of your final project is that it should emerge throughout the semester, anchored largely in your logs. Put differently: I recommend you document everything for both future reference and possible integration into your portfolio and its related statements and narratives. 

The final project can be submitted in whatever format you prefer: a DOCX file, HTML, a website, or transmedia (e.g., a combination of video and text-based narrative). At some point in the semester, I recommend consulting with me on your approach. Where necessary, I am happy to provide you with resources and to even offer tutorials / workshops when student interest in a particular approach is significant.  

While you are more than encouraged to collaborate with others on your contributions to a particular component of the exhibit, your final project should be authored individually (even if it references and builds upon what others contributed to your work and to the exhibit itself). Persuasive projects will integrate, augment, and complicate peer contributions to the literary exhibit.      

## Final Presentation (15%)

Your final presentation will assume the form of a collaborative roundtable, consisting of at least three people in the seminar and conducted during our last meeting of the semester. People from outside the seminar will be invited. Roundtables of three will last thirty minutes, and (if necessary) roundtables of four will last forty minutes. Each will have a question-and-answer period. By “collaborative” roundtable, I mean its design and implementation should be collaborative in character. How you present (including content, style, and technologies used) is up to you. However, please keep in mind two things: (1) you should reflect on and assess what you learned during the entire seminar (meaning it is not solely about your final project), and (2) everyone participating in your roundtable will be given the same grade (meaning collaboration is key). Please do not use the roundtable as an opportunity to only read text from your final projects.

## Regular Presentations (or Group Reports) (15%) 

Throughout the semester, during seminar you will be asked to give brief (i.e., two- to three-minute) and informal reports on the status of your contributions to the exhibit. Most of these will assume the form of group reports, where you will update us on the work you are doing with others (who share interests or are even collaborating with you). Ideally, these groups will emerge organically. Where necessary, I will organize them based on affinities. For each report, I will provide written and/or verbal feedback, almost always immediately after your presentation. The intended audience for these presentations is not, say, an audience at an academic conference. You should instead present with those of us in the seminar in mind. No need to write something and read it. And you should not over-prepare. Just be ready to tell us what you have been doing, what problems and curiosities have emerged, and to what effects. When possible, point us to evidence or documentation (e.g., on the web). 